<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c54"><span class="c44">Chapter Fourteen</span></h2>
    <p class="c59">
      <span class="c35 c31">Merry Christmas</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c43 c32">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">October turned the trees along Prince Street into a brief, bitter beauty that nobody in the tenements had time to notice. The sky hung low and gray over Boston, the kind of gray that pressed down on a person’s chest.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William stood on a ladder outside a brownstone on Hanover Street, painting trim in a cold rain that had started as mist and thickened into something with weight. His brush moved in long, even strokes. Mechanical. Precise. The kind of painting a man does when the alternative to working is thinking, and thinking is not something he could afford.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Below him, the foreman called up. “Boog, come down. We’re done for the day. Rain’s too heavy.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William did not come down. He loaded the brush and pulled another stroke across the fascia board. The rain ran down his forearms and dripped off his elbows. The white paint thinned and streaked.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Boog.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He came down. Slowly. He cleaned his brush against the ladder rung with the care of a man who had nothing else to care for at that moment. The other painters on the crew watched him from under the eaves. They gave him space. They had heard. Everyone on Prince Street had heard.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He walked home through the rain without hurrying. His boots found the cobblestones by memory.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">When he opened the door of the apartment, the silence met him first. Mary stood at the stove, her back to him, stirring something in a pot. The motion was correct. The rhythm was correct. The woman performing it had retreated to some interior room that William could not reach.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I’m home,” he said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She did not turn around. “Supper’s nearly done.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He hung his wet coat on the hook. Water pooled beneath it. In the next room, the children were arranged in a style of quiet that no child their age should have mastered. Mary Margaret sat on the floor with a piece of string, weaving it between her fingers in a pattern she had invented. Letitia sat beside her, not doing anything, only being near. Teresa scurried across the rug and stopped at William’s boots and looked up at him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary used to sing while she cooked. Irish songs, old ones, the melody filling the apartment. Sometimes the neighbors paused on the stairs to listen. She had not sung since Joseph. The apartment was smaller without her voice. The children did not ask about it. They lived in silence and waited for it to end.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Austin appeared in the doorway. He was six now, nearly seven years old, and something in his face had aged past his years. He carried a bucket of water he had fetched from the pump without being asked.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I got the water, Ma. And I walked the girls to Mrs. Flanagan’s this morning. Mary Margaret didn’t want to go but I told her she had to.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary looked at her eldest living son. She opened her mouth to thank him but the words snagged on something. She nodded instead. Austin set the bucket down and took his place at the table and served himself without fuss. He had learned that filling silence with noise was worse than letting it be. He was becoming his father’s son without anyone teaching him how, absorbing William’s rhythms through osmosis.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret clung to Austin during the long hours William worked. She watched how he handled the younger ones, how he broke bread for Teresa without being asked, and how he asked if he could help. She tried to carry herself the same, this six year old, squaring her small shoulders as if the posture alone could hold everything together.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Letitia was the quietest of them. She watched more than she spoke, and when one of the younger ones cried she was the first to reach them, a hand on a shoulder, a kiss pressed to the top of a head. Teresa was the opposite. She explored everything, went places she should not have gone, put things in her mouth that should not have been there. She made Austin and Mary Margaret earn their authority every day.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William came through the door one evening with a grin the children had not seen in months. He was carrying something behind his back.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Austin, set the table. Mary Margaret, bring that extra seat from the other room. Make sure everyone has a place to sit.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary looked up from the stove. William Boog had never once in their marriage cared about table settings.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Tonight we do something new,” he said. “An American tradition. Thanksgiving.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary stared at him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“What are you now, a Protestant? We celebrate the feast days of the saints, William. Not holidays invented by governments.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“We are in America. People here do this. And we don’t have a single tradition of our own. Not one. We could use one.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“And what are we supposed to eat? We can’t afford a turkey.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I’m well ahead of you.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The children heard his voice before they saw what he was holding.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I was on a jobsite today, moving lumber around, getting the scaffolding ready. Dording was sitting there, taking his break, eating crackers, and he dropped a few out of his pocket. This goose walked right up to eat them. Didn’t see me coming.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He came back into the room holding a goose by its neck. He lifted it high and showed it to the family with the biggest smile he had worn since Dublin.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Then, whack! I smacked it with a board! I got us a proper dinner!”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The kitchen went loud all at once. Austin was transfixed. Mary Margaret was horrified.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“We’re eating that?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“We are. Turnips too. We have stale breadcrumbs and an onion. Goose with stuffing. A real American meal.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary was in disbelief, but only for a moment. She studied the bird and imagined the size of her pots and pan. Then something switched on inside her. She knew exactly how to make the stuffing. She had watched her grandmother do it with whatever scraps were available, and the knowledge had lived in her hands all this time, waiting.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Austin helped William with the bird. William called the girls away from the table.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Girls, look away. Austin, come here.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William had been waiting for hours to do this with Austin. He laid the goose on a board and picked up a dull cleaver. His eyes went wide. He sucked in a breath and brought it down hard.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The head came off clean. Austin swore he saw the wings move. Mary Margaret screamed from across the room. The boys defeathered the goose. Feathers blew everywhere. Teresa collected them and stuck them in her hair and mouth. Letitia watched from the corner, skeptical and amused.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William and Austin plucked and burned what was left. Then came the part William had been waiting for all day.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“See where I cut? Reach in there and pull out the innards.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Austin put his hand inside the bird. His face went through several expressions at once. Within seconds he had forgotten entirely about dinner and was playing with the guts, stretching them between his fingers and chasing Mary Margaret around the room. She had been crying and pouting since the cleaver came down. Mary ignored all of it and stuffed the bird with her breadcrumb mixture. She and William cooked it together while the children settled.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">At the table, they joined hands. This was new. Nobody had asked them to. The room went quiet. Then Letitia spoke up in her small voice.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Lord bless this food and bless our bodies.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">A pause. Then everyone ate. Mary Margaret would not touch the goose. Stuffing and bread would do for her tonight. Teresa ate with her feathers still in her hair. Austin ate like a boy who had earned his meal.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William did not eat. He sat at the head of the table and watched his family. His plate was full, but his hands were in his lap.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I’m thankful for my family,” he said. “I never had a moment like this. Not once. Maybe this is what it means to be a Boog. Making something out of nothing. Being together.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary set down her fork. “You’re going to pray and give thanks when the American government tells you to? This is not how we were raised, William.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I’m not bowing to the government or anyone else. I’m saying we can sit at this table and be thankful. Not because someone told us to. Because we have each other and that is enough.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary looked at him. She looked at the children. Teresa with feathers in her hair. Austin with goose grease on his chin. Letitia sitting straight in her chair with a smile. Mary Margaret pouting but present.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She picked up her fork and went back to eating. She did not agree with him out loud. She did not need to. The table was full and the room was warm. For one evening, the Boog family was loud and alive.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The evenings returned to what they had been. William worked late. Mary held the house together.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">One night in early December, Teresa lay on her mattress with her breathing thick and labored. It felt like slime had formed at the back of her throat. You could not see it, but you could hear it in every raspy breath. Her neck was swollen on both sides. Other children on the floor had it too.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Austin at first tried to help Mary care for her, but he caught what Teresa had. Now two children needed Mary’s help.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret caught what they had. The apartment looked like a sick bay.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary examined Teresa by candlelight. Her face was calm but her eyes betrayed her. She had seen this before. Not this disease specifically, but this trajectory. The arc of a child going from fine to not fine.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Get the doctor,” she said to William. Steady. “Soon.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William did not ask anything back. He was already moving.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The doctor was different from the one who had come for Joseph. Older, tired, with the worn look of a man who had been making house calls in the tenements for too many years. He examined Teresa, pressing her tongue down with a wooden stick and looking at her throat. His face told them everything.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I’ve seen this in this building. Diphtheria, I’m afraid.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The word hung in the air. Mary closed her eyes. Opened them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“How long until she is better?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“The membrane in her throat is what does it. If it closes over, she can’t breathe. We try gargling with lime water, steam. Sometimes it helps. Some survive, some don’t. She’s far along.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“What do we do?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I suggest praying. And keep other children away from her. Has anyone else been in close contact?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Mary and Austin. They’re laying over there.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The doctor examined those two briefly.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“They have it too. Just keep the others away from her. Clean everything she’s touched. Get that membrane under control. Godspeed.” He packed his bag. At the door, he paused and looked back. “All three. They all stay separate. Keep others away from them too.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William and Mary looked at each other. The room contracted around them. William looked again at Austin.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Within days the room had been divided. On one side, Teresa lay in her bed, her breathing a horrible wet rasp. On the other, Austin and Mary Margaret, just far enough apart. The same throat sounds. The same swollen necks.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary moved between them. She pressed cool cloths to their foreheads. She spooned water between dry lips. She whispered to them constantly, words that could not be heard from the doorway but that never stopped.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She had not slept in two days. Her body moved on something beyond energy. She boiled water on the stove and carried it to each bedside in a basin. She soaked cloths and wrung them and laid them across foreheads that burned under her touch. She scraped lime from a block she had purchased from the chemist on Salem Street and mixed it with warm water. She held the cup to Austin’s lips and tilted it until he swallowed. She did the same for Teresa. She did the same for Mary Margaret. She started to see glimpses of a turnaround.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Her hands did not shake. They had wrung sheets in a wash house since she was fifteen. They had scrubbed floors on Aston’s Quay. They had pressed cool cloths to Joseph’s forehead in this same city. These hands knew the choreography of a sickroom.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">In the quiet hours between midnight and dawn she allowed herself one minute. She stood at the window with her back to the room and pressed her forehead against the cold glass. The street below was empty. A single gas lamp burned at the corner and its light fell on the cobblestones in a circle of yellow. She looked at that circle of light. She breathed. She counted to sixty. When she reached sixty she turned around and went back to work.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Letitia appeared in the doorway at four in the morning. She was five years old. She held a cup of water she had filled from the kitchen. She walked across the room and set it on the table beside her mother without being asked. Mary looked at her. Letitia looked back. No words. The child returned to the other room. Mary picked up the cup and drank.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William sat between the beds, equidistant from all three children, as though his position alone could somehow balance the scales. His hands hung between his knees.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The other children had been sent to a neighbor’s apartment. Through the neighbor’s cracked door, they huddled together, listening to the sounds that came through the walls.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">December 18, 1874. One week before Christmas. Snow fell outside the window, visible in the gaslight, each flake catching the glow for a moment before it vanished.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Austin lay in his bed. His breathing had changed. It was shallow now, each inhale a negotiation between his lungs and the membrane that was slowly closing them. He was thirteen years old. His eyes were slightly open.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William sat beside him. He held his son’s hand. Austin’s hand was hot and small in his father’s paint-stained grip.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Pa.” Austin’s voice was a whisper, ruined by the disease.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I’m here.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Are we going to move again?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William could not speak for a moment. He swallowed hard.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“We might.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Austin smiled. The ghost of a smile, thin and brief, but real.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Good,” he said. “I liked it when we moved. Something new to see. More birds to eat.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William held his son’s hand tighter. He smiled and his eyes got wet. Austin looked at the snow falling past the window. His eyes followed a single flake down.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I kill every bird in the world for you, Austin James. Right now, I need you to fight, okay?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Austin looked back at the window. His eyes slowly closed. His breathing slowed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Damn it Austin. Fight!”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">A gentle squeeze from Austin’s hand is all the reaction William got. The squeeze quickly lost its strength until Austin’s hand went limp.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“It’s not supposed to be like this! You can’t leave us! We need you! I need you…”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">His breathing slowed. Slowed. Stopped.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William did not let go of his hand. He sat there, perfectly still, as the snow continued to fall.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">In the other bed, Teresa, still fighting, coughed. Mary Margaret lay in silence.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William had become far too comfortable with burying his kids. Within days, their situation was sorted. Someone had stripped Austin’s bed. His things were gone. The space where he had slept was an open wound in the room.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Teresa lay in her bed, worse now. Mary had not left her side. Her eyes were red-rimmed and sunken. She held Teresa’s hand and sang to her. A lullaby in Irish, the words worn smooth by centuries of mothers singing them to children who might not survive the night.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c7 c31">Hush, O child, and do not cry, God’s own angels are hovering nigh...</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William stood in the doorway. He had come from the cemetery. Snow covered his coat. Dirt was under his fingernails from where he had helped dig his son’s grave because the ground was frozen and the gravediggers wanted extra money he did not have.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He watched Mary singing. He watched Teresa’s small chest rise and fall.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Outside, somewhere on Prince Street, carollers sang. The sound drifted in through the thin walls. Silent Night, in English, then in Italian from the next block. Christmas Eve in Boston.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Teresa’s breathing changed. Mary stopped singing. She looked at William. He walked across the room and knelt beside the bed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Teresa opened her eyes. She looked at her father, then her mother. She was three years old. She did not have words for what was happening. Her face told more than any words could.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary pulled her daughter close. William wrapped his arms around both of them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The snow fell. The carollers continued, their voices muffled and distant.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Silent night… Holy night… All is calm…”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The distance between the joy in those carols and the pain in the room was too much to bear.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c43 c32">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c12">
      <span class="c7 c65 c31">Austin Boog died December 18, 1874. Teresa Boog died December 24, 1874. No records were kept of the burials.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c12">
      <span class="c7 c65 c31">Mary Margaret had survived.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The apartment was dark. Mary was asleep. The depleted, involuntary sleep of a body that had nothing left. William sat at the table.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He took out the paper. Unfolded it. The crease was deep and soft now. This paper had been folded and unfolded too many times. The left half, under MARY: George X. Joseph X. Austin. Mary. Letitia. Teresa. William X.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He picked up the pen. Two X’s to write tonight. He had been putting this off for six days. Since Austin. Since the frozen ground. Since Christmas Eve.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He wrote the X after Austin. His only living son. The boy who had put his arm around Teresa on the stairs. The boy who had asked if they were going to move again. The only one who could carry on his name. The X was slow. His hand was slow. He had to press to finish the second stroke.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Then Teresa. The pen hovered over her name. She was three years old. She did not have words for what was happening.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He wrote the X.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">George X. Joseph X. Austin X. Mary. Letitia. Teresa X. William X.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Five X’s. The right half of the paper was still blank. He wondered if death would follow him on that side too. He folded the paper, put it in his breast pocket, and sat in the dark.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>