<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c54"><span class="c38">Chapter Thirty-Eight</span></h2>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c46 c31">A door slightly open</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">What remained was this.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">A man. A bench. A valley. An empty seat.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William sat on the left side. He had always sat on the left side. The right side was for someone else. Sometimes he pretended someone small sat there. A child. He did not have a clear picture. Just the idea of one, like imagining a piece of furniture in an empty room. The actual sight of a young child pulled him toward dark places he could not afford to enter. So the seat stayed empty, and he preferred it that way. The emptiness was safer than the presence.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He watched birds.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">This surprised him. The man who had shot everything that flew, to honor Austin. The man who had hunted birds with a twelve-gauge in the Minnesota brush and killed a goose with a plank of wood in Boston. Now he sat on a bench with a journal in his lap and tried to identify what was singing. Warblers. Thrushes. A red-tailed hawk that lived in the oak behind the house and circled the valley at dawn.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He filled pages. Quick sketches of beaks and wing shapes. Notes on color. Times of arrival and departure. The handwriting was shaky but legible, and the observations were precise. He had always noticed things. Now he noticed a warbler tilting its head before it sang. A hawk riding wind currents without moving its wings. Light coming through the feathers of a mourning dove, making them glow.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He still walked the town. Slowly, with the stick, his gait uneven but deliberate. He passed the storefronts he had painted. Some had been repainted by other men. He could tell. The coverage was uneven. The trim lines were sloppy. He would have said something once. He would have knocked on the door and offered to fix it. Now he just looked and kept walking.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He still owned property. He still reviewed contracts and signed deeds and wired money to Lottie. The painting business continued through Samuel. The lots in the additions held their value or gained it. His wall of deeds still curved around Grants Pass, open to the west, closed to the east.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Cyrus brought up the surgery again. A younger doctor, trained in San Francisco, examined the hip and suggested a procedure that could restore some mobility. William listened to the younger man describe the operation, the recovery, the odds of success. The younger man was optimistic. William watched his face while he talked. Confident. Clinical. The same face of every physician who had told him what his children had and then walked out the door.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“I’ve walked this far with a stick,” William said. “I’ll walk the rest.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He had nowhere to go, nothing to chase. He was learning, slowly, how to be in a single place. He was alone. For the first time in his life. Truly alone. No wife beside him. No children in the next room. No crew, no customers, no sign to hang, no ladder to climb. Just a man on a bench in a valley with the mountains holding the sky.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The stillness was terrible. And then it was not.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Somewhere in the middle of those years, something shifted. Not dramatically. Not in a moment he could point to. It shifted like dawn. So gradual that by the time you notice, the dark is already gone.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He stopped fighting the memories. Not because he had conquered them. Because he was too tired to fight. They came. He let them. They sat beside him on the bench and he did not flinch. George. Joseph. Austin. Teresa. John. Mary Margaret. William Jr. Mary. They came and stayed. Eventually they were not visitors but residents.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He sat on the bench one evening. Late. The valley was dark. Stars. The Siskiyous were a black line against a sky that went on forever.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He had not prayed since Dublin. Not really. He had attended masses because Mary asked. Funerals because they happened. He had stood in churches he painted and felt nothing but the cool of plaster and the echo of his own breathing. He shut God out the day George died. Shut him out harder with every X. Kept that door closed for sixty years.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He was not praying now. He was just sitting. Breathing. Present as he had never been, because he had always traded presence for motion. Motion was no longer available.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">A thought came to him. Uninvited. Unwelcome. Yet, it was undeniable.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He had not opened that door. Not once in sixty years. He had slammed it shut with every X and locked it with every move and barricaded it with work and forward motion. Sixty years of slamming a door.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">And it was still open.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He had not opened it. So either the latch was broken. Or somebody on the other side was more persistent than he was. He was too old and too tired to figure out which. But he noticed. Sitting on that bench with nobody to perform for and nothing to hide behind, he noticed that the door he had been slamming his entire life had never actually closed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He stopped slamming it. He considered what could be on the other side. The thought of that, that Mary and his daughters were right, what would that feel like? There was so much to wrestle with. He looks to the clouds and says silently, “I see, you ignored me my whole life and now you want to reveal yourself?” What happened next, it could have been his conscience or something deeper, but he had an immediate response, “I’m here as I’ve always been. It’s you who turned away and are looking back. My door is never closed.” William’s mind immediately stilled, and for once, a peaceful smile graced his weathered face.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>