<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c54">
      <span>Chapter Five</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c46 c31">Number Seven</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The year was 1865.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The tenements were behind them, the narrow lanes, the hanging blankets, the damp and the dark. They walked north to the quay. The River Liffey pushed gently through the centre of Dublin. Along its banks the great department stores rose, the buildings Dubliners call the Monster Houses. Their interiors lit by gas and stocked with goods from every corner of the Empire. Horse-drawn carriages thundered past. The quay hummed with commerce, ambition, and the energy of too many people wanting too many things in too small a space.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William and Mary walked through this world like immigrants in their own city. Mary carried a bundle of their belongings, everything they own wrapped in cloth. William carried a toolbox in one hand and the weight of determination in the other. His eyes were wide. Mary was visibly pregnant, her dress straining at the waist. She walked with the careful, flat-footed gait of a woman whose centre of gravity had shifted.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">It was their first home together.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William stopped in front of a narrow shopfront wedged between an iron worker and a tea warehouse. The number seven was painted above the lintel in faded white. The window was dirty. The door hung crooked on one hinge, its bottom edge scraping the stone. A faded TO LET sign curled in the glass.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William looked at Mary. She looked at the shop. She looked at him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"This is it, then? Number 7 Aston's Quay? Our first place together is here?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"This is it."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She surveyed the grime. The filthy glass. The crooked door. The black mold creeping along the lintel. "It's filthy."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"It'll clean up."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"The door's broken."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I'll fix it."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A long silence. Mary looked at the quay, the carriages, the noise, the sheer scale of commerce roaring past their tiny, broken shopfront.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I don't know. The tenements cost us next to nothing. It's what we know. We understand how things work there. It's just so busy up here. It’s such a change. It feels as though we don't belong. I just feel..."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Hey!" William grins, wide and sudden. "You've got a husband now. Let him lead you about a bit, would you?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A hint of a smile cracked Mary's expression. "Well, fix the door first. I'm not having our first customer think we live in a barn."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"And what’s the harm in a barn? In you go, little lamb!"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Enough of that. Besides, we can’t just walk in uninvited. Who owns the place?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Some guy named Joseph. He's out of town by now. But I already gave him the first month's rent, so we have no choice. We're staying in this barn."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He smiled again.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"We live upstairs, shop is downstairs. I'll grab my shop supplies and make my sign and layout my things down here. I'm a simple man, just throw my stuff upstairs and I can sort it later."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I'm well ahead of you. And I'll see to those foul garments of yours. They smell of something terrible..." She pauses, narrows her eyes. "Wait a moment... perhaps you do live in a barn. That would explain the smell!"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She was laughing now. William laughed with her. They pushed each other on the footpath like children, jostling and nudging. Her hand found his chest. His arm caught her waist. Their faces drew near until they were a breath apart.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">They transformed the space. William adjusted the crooked door, rehung it on new hinges until it swings true. Mary scrubbed the floors on her hands and knees, her pregnant belly pressing against her dress, her arms working in the same relentless rhythm that wrung sheets in the wash house on Stephen Street. William built a workbench from scavenged wood, scraps from the iron worker next door, a plank salvaged from a broken cart on the quay. He measured with a makeshift ruler, a small plank with hand cut notches in it. He cut with a saw that needed sharpening. He fit the joints with the same patience Doyle taught him, testing each one with his thumb before he slams the nail.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He painted a new sign. Clean block letters on fresh board: W. BOOG — BOOTMAKER. He carried it outside and hung it above the door of number seven Aston's Quay, and then he stepped back and looked at it. He’d done this before.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The sign hung straight. His name, in full, above a proper door on a proper street. Not a stall on Stephen Street, not a corner borrowed from Doyle. His. He reached up and pressed his palm flat against the painted letters. The paint was dry. The wood was solid. “Hrmm.” A slight grin shows, as he knows he isn’t done yet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He dropped his hand. Adjusted the sign a fraction of an inch. Good to go, time to get to work.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The shop opened. William stood at the counter in a clean shirt, his bench stocked, his tools laid out with the precision of a surgeon's tray. His first customer was a dockworker with cracked boots and the apologetic expression of a man who knows he has waited too long. William shook his hand warmly, examined the boots, turned them over, tested the sole with his thumb. William was bold like Doyle with his customers, but always found the silver lining with them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Through the window, the quay bustled past. Carriages, walkers, the constant traffic of a city in motion. Inside the shop, William worked in quiet focus. The only sounds were the pull of thread through leather, the tap of a hammer, the scrape of a knife edge. He had built an island of calm craft in the middle of Dublin commerce, and the river of people flowed past, and the island held.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Months passed. The shop filled. A few pairs of finished boots lined a shelf. They didn’t last long. A gentleman customer examined a pair and ran his fingers against the stitching. Forties, well-dressed, with the sceptical eye of a man who had been cheated before.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"And these will last through a winter?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Sir, those boots will last through three winters, and by then you'll come back not because they've worn out, but because you'll want a second pair for the summer."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The gentleman laughed despite himself. He reached for his money.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William read people the way he judged leather, by touch, by instinct, by the quality of the grain. He knew when to push and when to step back, when to joke and when to be serious, when to let the work speak and when to speak for it. A society woman wanted boots for her husband, and William convinced her that her husband did not know what he wanted until William told him. A sceptical merchant doubted the price of custom soles, and William explained the difference between the cost of a sole and the cost of inconvenience and the way people perceive you. He made a child laugh while fitting his first pair of shoes, and the child's mother ordered a pair for herself before they leave.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">On the quay, this skill made money.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Golden hour. The sun danced on the river Liffey. It turned to hammered copper in the late-afternoon. The department stores cast long shadows across the water. The carriages were thinning as the day winds down, the thunder of hooves softening to an occasional clatter.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William stood outside his shop, rolling down his sleeves after a long day. His back ached. He flexed his fingers open and closed, working the stiffness out. Mary came out and stood beside him. She was further along in her pregnancy now, large enough that she moved with his hand bracing the small of her back. She leaned against his shoulder because she was tired and he was solid and the day had been long.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">They watched the sun descend over the rooftops toward the mouth of the Liffey, toward the sea, toward the west. The light turned the river to gold and then to something deeper, a color that had no name but existed only in this city at this hour.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I don't think I've found you just yet," William said. Quiet. Almost to himself. His eyes were on the western sky.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary looked at him. "Who are you talking to?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I'm not sure."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She shook her head softly and took his arm. They went back inside. William paused at the door. The shop was dim now, the leather and oil smell thickening in the cooling air. He looked at his bench, his tools, the boots lined up along the wall. All of it his. None of it enough.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>