<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c54"><span class="c38">Chapter Thirty-Seven</span></h2>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c46 c31">The rooms I go to when I close my eyes</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie stayed two weeks.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She cleaned the room. She organized the desk. She answered the letters from tenants and signed the contracts that needed signing, including a deed transfer in Lincoln Park that had been sitting unsigned for two months. She cooked meals that William ate half of and left the rest. She sat with him on the bench in the evenings and listened to him talk and listened to him not talk. She held his hand when he shook. She did not flinch when he wept.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She tried. She tried with competence and warmth and the Kansas practicality that had carried her through widowhood. She organized. She managed. She made lists and sorted papers and cleaned surfaces and believed, for the first two weeks, that the problem was disorder. That if she could put his life back in order, the man himself would follow.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He did not follow.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He sat on the bench. He limped to the desk and stared at the ledger. He slapped it shut without working. He woke in the night breathing hard in the dark. She reached for him and he flinched.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She flinched at the flinching. In seven years of marriage, William Boog had never pulled away from her touch.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Let me help you,” she said one evening. They were on the bench. The sunset was behind the mountains. The valley was doing its beautiful work. Neither of them was looking at it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“You can’t fix this, Lottie.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“I’m not trying to fix it. I’m trying to be here.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Being here brings it all back.” He said it quietly. Without malice. As a fact. “You bring Minnesota with you. The house. The kids. The whole life. And when I look at you I see all of it and I can’t hold it all at once. I’ve been carrying it one piece at a time my whole life. Now it’s all in the room.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie looked at the mountains. She was quiet for a long time.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“No,” she said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William looked at her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“No, William. You do not get to say that to me.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Her voice was low. Controlled. The voice of a woman who had spent sixteen years managing her own pain in private and was now, for the first time, letting someone see the edge of it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I left four children in Minnesota. Four. Charlotte is fourteen years old and she sits at the kitchen table every morning and asks me when her father is coming home. I have no answer for her. I have been giving her no answer for seven years.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She stood from the bench. She did not raise her voice. She did not need to.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I arranged two weeks away from them. I paid the taxes early. I cooked meals and labeled them and wrote instructions for every day I would be gone. I asked your son to check on the house. I rode a train for four days across a country I did not ask to cross. I arrived and found whiskey bottles on your shelf and contracts unsigned and your bed unmade.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Her hands were at her sides. Her fingers were straight. The ring on her right hand caught the last of the light.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I cleaned your desk. I answered your letters. I signed deeds you should have signed yourself. I sat beside you on this bench and held your hand while you wept. I have held your hand from a thousand miles away for seven years, William. I have kept your books and raised your children and collected your rent and managed your grief from a kitchen table in St. Paul while you sat on this porch and looked at mountains. I’ve been telling people I am a widow since you’ve been gone so long.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William did not speak. His eyes were wet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I chose you. I did not have to. I had a husband who came home every night and sat at the table and asked about my day. I buried him and I raised six children alone. I chose you because I saw something in you worth building beside. I walked into your grief with open eyes.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She turned to face him fully. The brooch at her collar was level with his eyes.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Do not tell me that my presence is the problem. Do not tell me that looking at me brings it all back. I am not your grief, William. I am the woman who has been carrying it alongside you. And I will not stand on this porch and be made to feel like a burden for answering a letter you wrote. You asked me to come. I came.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The silence that followed belonged to her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William sat on the bench with his stick between his knees. He did not defend himself. There was no defense. Everything she had said was true. It reminded him of the way everything Mary had said in the candlelit room above number thirteen had been true. The women in his life saw him clearly. Both had looked at him without flinching and told him what he was.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Lottie sat back down. Not close to him. At the far end of the bench. She put her hands in her lap and looked at the valley and let the silence fill the space between them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">After a long time, William spoke. His voice was hoarse.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You’re right.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I know I’m right.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I don’t know how to fix what’s broken in me, Lottie.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I know that too.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The conversation happened on a Tuesday. Lottie noticed the tone of his voice when he wasn’t negotiating. He wasn’t. This time he was confessing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">They sat at the desk in his room. She had laid out the property documents, the bank statements, the contracts for his crew. She had made everything neat. The three lots in Virginia’s name, properly filed. The deed for Rose’s parcel, routed through the convent. Lottie’s own holdings, organized and current. She had done in three weeks what William had neglected for months. It was a reflex, the making-neat. A woman who could organize a blended family of ten children and manage properties across two states could organize a desk. The desk was not the problem.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“William, come home. Come back to Minnesota. The children miss you. Alex asks about you every morning at breakfast. Charlotte drew you a picture last week and asked me to mail it. The house is there. I am there.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“My life is not in Minnesota.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Then what is your life?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He looked at her. The look lasted too long. She had to glance away.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“I don’t know anymore,” he said. “That’s the honest answer. I built everything a man is supposed to build. I have the deeds and the bank accounts and the name on the sign. And none of it stops the thing that happens when I close my eyes.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie reached across the desk and took his hand. “Boogs don’t quit, William. You told me that. You told Mary that. You’ve said it to every child you ever raised.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">His jaw worked. His mouth opened and closed. A tremor moved through him, visible from across the desk.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“I’m not quitting.” His voice shook. “I’m broken. There’s a difference. You can’t win against death. You can fight it and fight it and the thing just keeps taking. If you knew what I carry, Lottie. If you knew the rooms I go to when I close my eyes. Winning isn’t an option. It never was. Life has taken too much from me and I can’t take one ounce of it back.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The room was quiet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie gazed at William. She loved him. She loved him steadily, practically, with her whole heart. She had chosen him knowing exactly what she was choosing. She loved his ambition, his stubbornness, his impossible confidence. She loved the tenderness he only showed to children and to horses and, occasionally, to her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She could not fix this. He did not want to be fixed. He needed to be still yet the stillness was destroying him. She could not make him move or make him well. She had four children in Minnesota who needed a mother more than this man needed a witness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The thought had started in the second week. She organized the letters. Within days they piled up again. Then Charlotte’s letter arrived from St. Paul, written in a child’s careful hand, asking when Mama was coming home. Then she lay awake beside William and listened to him breathe in the dark. Shallow breathing. She understood she could not breathe for him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She made her decision. From the outside it looked like a woman packing a bag.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The morning she left. Rain again. Oregon rain, soft and persistent.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie stood on the porch with her bag at her feet. William stood beside her with his stick. They did not touch.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“I’m going home,” she said. “My children need their mother. I cannot stay here and watch you disappear.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“I know,” William said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“When you’re ready, come home. The house is there. The children are there. I am there.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“I know.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She looked at him one more time. She searched his face for the man she had married. The man who had raced her carriage to Como Park. The man who had held her on the bluffs above the Mississippi and told her about six small graves. She found pieces. Fragments. The mustache. The hands. His jaw. The engine that had driven him from Dublin to the edge of the continent was gone.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She picked up her bag. She kissed his cheek. The brooch at her collar pressed cold against him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“You are a good man,” she said. “And I am not leaving you. I am going home to raise our children. That is what I can do. That is what I will do.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William nodded. The nod was slow.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie walked to the road where the cart was waiting to take her to the station. She did not look back. Not because she did not want to. Because she knew what she would see. A man standing on a porch with a walking stick, watching her go. The same man who had always left first. Being left behind.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The cart pulled away. William watched it until it turned the corner and was gone. He stood on the porch. The rain fell. He went inside and sat at the desk and poured a drink and did not touch it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie arrived in St. Paul four days later. She unpacked. She kissed her children. She went to the kitchen alone. Put the kettle on. Sat down at the table and cried. She tried to keep her moans quiet and quickly wiped tears as they came. Her handkerchief was ready to wipe her nose with a dab here and there. She glanced around and felt relief as no one had noticed. She washed her face, cleaned up, and took a big sigh.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She managed the properties. She paid the taxes. She answered the telephone when it rang. She filed the deeds William sent and followed up on the ones he forgot. She negotiated with the Carroll Avenue tenant and collected the back rent without William’s knowledge because it needed doing and she did not need his permission to do what needed doing. She balanced the accounts for both states. She enrolled the children in school, attended their programs, helped with their lessons. She walked them to church on Sundays. She cooked their meals, washed their clothes. She made William Travers fix the broken step on the back porch with a hammer and nails because the carpenter wanted three dollars and he could do it for free. She arranged socials and reunions.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2 c32">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">A morning in December. The house on Dayton Avenue was quiet. It had always seemed to have a heavier quiet since William left. Not silent. The children made noise. The furnace clanked in the basement. The wind pressed against the windows. Underneath the ordinary sounds there was a hollowness. Every room had a corner where he could have been.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie sat at the kitchen table before the children woke. She had been up since five. The lamp burned low at her elbow. In front of her sat the property ledger. The Roblyn Avenue taxes were due in January. The Carroll Avenue tenant had paid December’s rent three weeks late. A deed transfer required a notarized signature. Hers. William had given her power of attorney before he left for Oregon and she used it daily. Without ceremony.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She opened the morning paper. Read the headlines. Read the obituaries. Read the want ads. She read the property listings because William had taught her that the listings told you where a city was growing before the city knew it itself. She circled two in pencil. She would drive past them on her way to the post office.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The tea was cold. She had poured it twenty minutes ago and forgotten it. She wrapped her hands around the cup anyway. The house creaked around her. Snow pressed against the windows. The furnace kicked on and the vents exhaled warm air that smelled faintly of coal dust.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She thought about Kansas. She did this rarely. Kansas was behind her. On mornings when the house was quiet and the ledger was open and the chair across from her was empty she allowed herself a few minutes in a place where the sky was bigger and the decisions were simpler. She had painted fences in Kansas. She had fed chickens and milked cows and helped her father with the books. She had married a war hero and buried him and crossed a state line with six children and started over. This made her become frail and unconfident. She had done all of that before she met William Boog.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She was not a woman who needed rescuing. She had chosen William. She had chosen him at a church social with lemonade in her hand and full knowledge of what she was walking into. A widower with grief in his bones and ambition that would not let him rest. She had looked at this man and seen something worth being beside. Not because she was lonely. Because she was curious. She wanted to see what a man with that much fire in him would build next.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She finished the ledger. She tallied the columns. The numbers balanced. They always balanced when she kept them. William’s numbers were ambitious. Hers were accurate. Between the two of them the family had not missed a payment on anything since the day they married.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Charlotte came downstairs first. She was fourteen now. Tall for her age with her father’s dark hair and dark eyes. She poured herself a glass of milk and sat down across from Lottie and looked at the ledger.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Is that Pa’s?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“It’s ours. I keep it current while he’s in Oregon.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“When is he coming home?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie closed the ledger. She looked at her daughter. The question had arrived at the table before the toast. Charlotte asked it every few weeks. She asked it casually, as if the answer did not matter. It mattered.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“When his work is finished, sweetheart. He has business to tend to.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Charlotte drank her milk. She did not believe the answer. She was old enough to read her mother’s face and her mother’s face held something unresolved. She was also old enough to know that pressing would not help.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Can I help with the books?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie looked at her daughter. She remembered being fourteen in Kansas. She remembered sitting at her father’s desk and watching him work the columns. She remembered the moment he slid the ledger across the table and put the pencil in her hand and said nothing. Just waited for her to begin.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She opened the ledger. She slid it across the table. She put the pencil in Charlotte’s hand.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“January taxes are due on the Roblyn lots. The amount is listed on page twelve. I need you to write a check for that amount and address the envelope to the Ramsey County Assessor. Can you do that?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Charlotte picked up the pencil. She opened to page twelve. She began. Lottie watched her daughter’s hand move across the paper.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The other children came down. The kitchen filled with noise. Louise wanted oatmeal. Virginia wanted toast. Alex was rambunctious and wanted anything including attention.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She put her coat on after breakfast. She walked to the post office. She mailed the tax payment and a letter to William. The letter was two pages. Business on the first page. The second page she wrote faster. She told him about Charlotte helping with the books. She told him about the snow. She told him Alex had started asking questions. She did not tell him to come home. She had told him once. She would not repeat herself.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">On the walk back she passed the Carroll Avenue property. She stopped. The front porch had a broken rail. She made a note in the small book she carried.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She stood on the sidewalk looking at the house. A house with William’s name on the deed and nobody named William inside it. The cold worked through her coat. She wrote fix rail and closed the book and kept walking.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>