<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
        <h2 class="c54">
      <span>Chapter One</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c46 c31">Raw, furious, and unmistakably alive</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The water found its way through everything in the tenements. It dripped from the roof, pooled in the stairwells, followed the cracks in the walls. The mortar and plaster felt like it hadn’t been dry since the building went up.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">November 12, 1841. A woman screamed on the upper floor of a tenement house. The shoe brokers on the street below paused. The furniture-maker across the way glanced up. Water dripped from a window sill onto cobblestones and caught a sliver of sun.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Below the rooflines, the tenements sprawled in every direction. This was Dublin's oldest and poorest quarter. This world was a labyrinth of narrow lanes speckled with washing lines and wooden wheeled carts. People spilled onto the street to take part in life. Coal smoke hung in a grey haze that never quite lifted. Shoe brokers called out prices from their doorways on Stephen Street. A furniture-maker hunched over a chair frame in his window, his mouth full of tacks. When a horse passed through, children ran to it before anyone could stop them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Through a cracked window on the upper floor of a tenement house, a single room. Twelve feet by twelve feet. Three families shared this space, divided by hanging blankets that stopped neither sound nor smell. The walls wept with the same damp that found its way through everything here. No separate bedrooms. The only furniture was a single table and a couple of stools.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">In the far corner of the room, a young woman lay on a straw mattress. Her age was unknown, but she was very young. Sweat beaded on her forehead which made her dark hair stick to her face. Eyes squinting. Three or four deep breaths then a long grunt, again and again. A midwife knelt between her legs, sleeves rolled past the elbow, hands ready. Two other women from the room hovered nearby because there was literally nowhere else to go. The room was the room. Everyone in it heard everything.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The young woman screamed. The room went still. The shoe brokers on the street below paused mid-sentence. The furniture-maker lifted his head from his work.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Then a cry. Raw, furious, and unmistakably alive.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The midwife lifted the child. A boy. She wiped him with a grey rag that had done this duty before. The rag only did partial duty here. She placed him, still slick and screaming, on his mother's chest. The mother stared at her son with exhausted wonder. </span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"A boy," the midwife said. "Strong lungs on him."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The mother cradled him. She touched his face ever so gently. She couldn’t say any words just yet, only sounds. She only said “oh….” in a fragile, soft voice, which made the baby stop crying. He stared up at her with a focus that seemed intense for something just minutes old. His eyes darted around the room and settled on his mother.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The midwife peeked out the window. She was looking for something she already knew was not there. "Has his father got a name for him?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The mother’s expression slowed down. There was no father to speak of. There was no family name to carry forward, no tradition to honor. No grandfather, no uncles, she was on her own here. A single trip to Scotland for work, and she came back carrying more than she left with. She chose this name herself, weeks ago. It was the only thing she had to give him that was entirely hers.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"William," she whispers.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Just the name itself. Solid. A common name that wouldn’t stand out. Safe. She pressed her lips to the crown of his head, and the boy blinked once. Dawn approached and for one moment, the tenement glowed softly.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Then a man in the next partition coughed hard enough to shake the blanket divider. A dog barked somewhere below. People were yelling on the street again. The light on the wall thinned, dimmed, and was gone.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Dublin reclaimed the room.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Within two weeks, the mother confirmed she could not raise a child in the tenements alone. She had barely survived the birth. Her body was weak, her household no place for a child. There was no privacy. Everybody knew everybody’s business. The fighting, the sex, the drinking, the abuse. She woke each morning next to four other people on the same mattress. The coat she used for a blanket lay over William on the floor. She packed up William and headed out to visit James and Mary.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">James and Mary Boog were the family who had recommended she visit their distant cousins in Scotland. The arrangement had already been made. This was the day. James was willing to take in a child his distant cousin had sired. The mother handed the baby over in a quick, cold manner.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c34">
      <span class="c1">        “I don’t have much for him. I’d like to keep the coat. Keeps me warm.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c34">
      <span class="c1">        The mother looked down at the ground and handed William over. Mary brought him close to keep him warm.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c34">
      <span class="c1">        “We will raise him as our own. Your secret is safe with us. Thank you.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c34">
      <span class="c1">        The boy’s mother stood a moment longer, her arms empty now, then turned back toward the tenement without looking at the child again. Her footsteps faded on the cobbles.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c34">
      <span class="c1">        James and Mary went into their house on Stephen Street. The house was in rough shape, and a lot of people lived there. It was more civil than where William had just come from, albeit just as poor.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c34">
      <span class="c1">        Mary carried the boy up the stairs. He had stopped crying. His eyes moved over the stained walls, the cracked ceiling, the narrow landing where a neighbour’s washing hung on a line. He did not know any of these things were poor. He did not know anything yet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c34">
      <span class="c1">        Outside, rain began again. Across the city, in the locked gardens of St. Stephen’s Green, the ornamental trees dripped quietly behind their iron railings. Twenty-seven acres of green, kept for the wealthy, visible from the tenement windows but never touched. The boy would grow up seeing those gates and dreaming.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>