<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c54"><span class="c38">Chapter Thirty-Three</span></h2>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c46 c31">Three thuds in one second</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c7 c31">October, 1903. Three years in the valley.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The morning was cold in the way Oregon mornings get cold, not the kill-you-standing cold of Minnesota, but a wet chill that found the joints and stayed there. Fog wandered around, being wisped away by a chilly breeze and replaced minutes later.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William was working on a two-story farmhouse on the south side of the Rogue River. It was a contract he had taken personally because the owner, a timber man named Harlan, had insisted on seeing the old man’s work up close. William had obliged. He was sixty-two years old and he climbed ladders with the muscular patience of a man who had been doing it for more than thirty years. His crew worked the lower sections. William took the peak.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">A confident William climbed up with a toothpick in his mouth. The taste of wood filled his mouth as he worked. He was cutting in the trim line below the gable, a detail job that required a loaded brush and a steady hand. The brush moved in short, precise strokes. White lead over bare wood. Each stroke laid down clean.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Dew had settled on the rungs overnight and the foggy weather ensured it wasn’t going anywhere. William noticed this. He shifted his weight to reach the far edge of the trim board. He got it in one solid stroke. He had a brief moment of panic only to realize he still had it. He looked at the painted trim and beamed. He came back down.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">His left boot, the worn sole of a boot he should have replaced two months ago, found a wet rung and did not hold.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">His foot slipped. His body torqued. His right hand grabbed for the ladder rail and caught it, but the momentum was too much. The ladder kicked sideways. For one second he was suspended, feet off the rungs, one hand on a rail that was already moving away from the wall. Three distinct thuds happened within a second: the paint can, the ladder, then William.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He landed on his left hip. His body imprinted on the packed clay beside the foundation.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The sound of everything dropping was alarming, but the silence that followed created true shock. The impact was loud enough to stop the crew mid-stroke. Three thuds followed by silence. Not a sound was made for a few seconds. Then the air filled with footsteps and a low groan.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William had heard a different sound. Something only audible to him. A snap or pop noise that came from inside his body. He felt it before he felt the pain, a displacement, a wrongness in the joint that registered as physics before it registered as agony.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Then the pain arrived.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He did not scream. He ground his teeth until his jaw ached and pulled a long hissing breath through his nose. He lay on his side in the dirt with the spilled paint pooling white against the clay. His balled-up fists pounded the ground in anger. Someone was calling for a doctor.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William lay there and looked at the sky. The fog persisted. The mountaintops were playing hide and seek with him. A bird circled through the fog and settled in the treeline.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">His left hip felt like someone had driven a railroad spike through the socket. He tried to sit up. His body refused. This was new. William Boog had never been refused by his own body. He had worked through fevers, injuries and exhaustion for forty years. His body had always done what he told it to do.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Not today.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Don’t move him,” someone said. “Get the doctor. Get the damn doctor.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William lay in the dirt talking to his crew. He closed his eyes and took a deep breath.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The doctor in Grants Pass was a man named Cyrus. Fifties, thin, with the calm hands and tired eyes of a physician who served a county too large for one man. He examined William in the back room of the house, pressing and rotating the hip with careful, practiced movements.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William’s face went white. His fists balled against the mattress. He did not make a sound.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“The socket is damaged,” Cyrus said. “I can’t tell if it’s a fracture or a dislocation without better equipment. Either way, the joint won’t bear weight the same. Likely not ever.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“What does that mean?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“It means you will walk. Probably with a stick. Climbing a ladder is out of the question. Any sustained overhead work, reaching above your head for hours at a time...” He shook his head. “Your painting days are done, Mr. Boog. At least the kind where you’re twenty feet off the ground.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William stared at the ceiling. The plaster was water-stained. A crack ran from the corner to the center of the room.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“There’s a surgeon in Portland who might be able to do more. The rail gets you there in a day.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William looked at this man. This doctor, packing his bag, offering a referral. The same profession that had looked at Joseph and said Cholera Infantum and left. That had looked at Teresa and Austin and said diphtheria and told Mary to pray. That had examined the tumor in Mary’s belly and used words that amounted to nothing. Every doctor who had ever entered a room where William loved someone had walked out of that room and the person he loved had died.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“He’ll just make it worse,” William said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He was not going to think on it. He was already done.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The walking stick appeared within a week. Oak, hand-cut, shaped from a branch he had trimmed from a tree on one of his lots. He used it as an extension of his body. But the men on his crew noticed. They noticed him standing at the bottom of the ladder watching them work the high sections. They noticed his right hand opening and closing around the handle of the stick, the unconscious grip of a man reaching for something that was no longer there.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William Boog had spent his life climbing. Ladders, stairs, gangways, scaffolds. Every surface he had ever painted was above him, and the reaching, the ascending, was not just work but identity.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He stood below the scaffold now, looking up. His crew climbed past him. He held the stick with both hands and watched them go where he could not.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>