<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c17">
      <span class="c38">Chapter Thirty</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c46 c31">A changing world that feels smaller</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c39">
      <span class="c1">Life, as it always does, continued. William was fighting against the fact that the Boog kids could all be gone before he knew it. The subtraction seemed to be happening more often than the addition. The Dayton Avenue house was never quiet for long enough to let the absence settle.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c10">
      <span class="c1">The year before had been brutal. The economic panic of 1893 swept through the upper Midwest. Banks failed. Contractors William had worked with for a decade shuttered overnight. Jobs thinned across the building trades until whole weeks passed without a call. William took whatever work came and did it right. He cut no corners. The men who knew his reputation kept hiring him, and he outlasted the ones who did not.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c10">
      <span class="c1">Louise arrived in the autumn of 1894, after the worst had passed. Lottie labored in the upstairs bedroom while the midwife worked beside her. Downstairs, Charlotte and the older children pressed their ears to the floorboards and listened for the cry. When it came, muffled through the pine planks, they cheered.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Bound and determined, William and Lottie ended up pregnant again. Virginia followed two years later, in the summer of 1896, born during a heat wave that turned the upstairs rooms into ovens and sent the children sleeping on blankets in the yard. William rigged a canvas shade over the back porch and soaked rags in well water for Lottie’s forehead. The iceman on Snelling Avenue had doubled his prices. William paid without complaint. The house filled with new voices even as some were permanently missing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">By now William was 56 years old. He knew what was in the cards for him. He was destined to have plenty of daughters. He truly loved his daughters. He also felt a hole. Something missing. He knew what it was. He just never said it out loud.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Lottie, you have nine children. Three by me.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Then he became silent.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“William, are you doing that thing again? What big important news do you have for me?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I don’t have any big plans. I just…”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“You don’t have to say it William. And you don’t have to worry about me or my children. We all are fine. You want a boy, don’t you?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“It’s a painful subject. I’d be surprised if I can even produce a healthy boy at this point.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">They discussed plans further. Lottie was 38 years old and willing to try. By 1897 Lottie was carrying again. She moved through the crowded house with the steady certainty of a woman who had done this before and intended to do it well. The hem of her dress brushed the baseboards as she bent to pick up a stray sock, a wooden block, a page torn from the Sears and Roebuck catalog that one of the children had been studying. William fussed. He insisted she sit when she wanted to stand and rest when she wanted to work. She told him to stop fussing. He did not stop fussing. He had buried too many to take any birth lightly.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Alex was born on a sunny yet cold March morning in 1898. Another Boog boy. The doctor arrived by horse and buggy over roads still rutted with ice, his black leather bag clicking as he climbed the stairs. When it was done and the crying started, William stood in the hallway with his hat in his hands, listening. He had heard this sound thirteen times before and it still buckled something in his chest. The doctor opened the bedroom door and nodded and William went in. “Congratulations, Mr. Boog, on your healthy baby boy.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">The doctor said the word "healthy" and William heard it and set it aside. Healthy was a word with an expiration. George had been healthy. William Jr. had been healthy. Joseph, for a while, had been healthy. Austin for a long time. The word meant: not yet. He held Alex and the room was quiet. William noticed he was not thinking. Not planning, not counting months, not measuring the boy against the others. His mind was still. Completely still. It should have been relief. It was not relief. It was the blankness of a man who has exhausted every way of preparing for what he knows is coming and has nothing left but to sit with the boy in the light and wait.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He held his son. The baby was calm. Four with Lottie, two surviving from Mary. Six children under his care. The math of his family was a ledger that never balanced. New life on one side, loss on the other, and the margin between just a soft crease on old paper.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">On the paper, the right half filled in. Under CHARLOTTE: Charlotte. Louise. Virginia. Alex. Four names. No X’s. The right side of the paper was clean. No crosses, no grief, just names being lived. William looked at both halves. The left, scarred with X’s. The crease between them held the weight of everything he had learned about what it costs to love.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c20">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Rose came to William on a spring evening. The air was warm and dew was on the grass in the event, the kind of dew she had spent years trying to capture on paper. She stood in the doorway of his study with her hands clasped in front of her, and William knew before she spoke. He had seen this posture before. In Letitia. In the quiet way both of Mary’s girls held themselves when they had something important to say.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“The Sisters of St. Joseph of Carondelet have an art school, Pa.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">William set down his pen.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I’ve been accepted.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He did not speak for a long time. He looked at his youngest daughter by Mary. The girl who had painted the front of the house. The one who told him he was both a painter and an artist. The girl who had picked the name Magdalen for baby Charlotte’s middle name, a name she would carry forward in a way none of them yet understood. The girl who had him wrapped around her finger.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“You too,” he said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Rose nodded.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">The last two of Mary’s daughters. Both behind convent walls. He had watched Letitia go. He had survived it. This was different only in the arithmetic. The result was the same. Mary’s children were scattering. Not through death this time. Through devotion. Through their mother’s faith, passed down so completely that it consumed them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Is this what you want, Rose? Not what you feel called to. What you want.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“It’s the same thing, Pa. You know that. You’ve been chasing the same feeling your whole life. You just put it into painting houses instead of prayers.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He looked at her. She was right. She was completely right. And it cost him something to hear it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Sister Magdalen,” she said. “That’s the name I’ve chosen.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">The middle name she had given to baby Charlotte. The name she now took for herself.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">William nodded. He did not trust his voice. He stood and put his arms around his daughter and held her. Rose always had access to his heartstrings. He wanted to keep her in his pocket. He knew he couldn’t.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I’ll cherish your painting forever.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">As soon as those words slipped out of his mouth, a sense of peace and comfort left with it. Something that had been dormant inside of him awakened. He did not want it awakened.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c20">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">The letters from Kansas would arrive periodically, carried by the mail wagon that ran up Dayton Avenue each morning at half past ten. As of late, they did not arrive. Lottie’s family was living in the Kansas property and had not paid rent in six months.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Lottie stood behind William at his desk, arms crossed, her face tight.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Six months,” she said. “They haven’t paid in six months, William.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“They’re your family, Lottie.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I know exactly whose family they are. And I know exactly what they’re doing. They think because I’m a thousand miles away, they can live in that house for free. My name is on the mortgage. Your name is on the mortgage. And they’re not paying.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">William read the latest letter. A litany of excuses. Hard times, bad crops, next month for certain, they had hope.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“You can hope in one hand, crap in the other, see which one fills first.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">William lacked subtlety at times. However, he had heard this language before. In Dublin, it was the landlord’s threat. In Boston, it was the rent going up. Now he was on the other side of the equation, and it tasted wrong.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Have you written to them?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Three times. The last letter came back with a promise and a prayer. The bank does not accept prayers, William.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">William set the letters down. He looked at Lottie. This practical, capable woman who did not ask for help lightly, who had brought her own property into this marriage as a point of pride. The Kansas house was hers. The failure of it was costing her something beyond money.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“We foreclose,” he said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Lottie was quiet for a moment. These were her people. Her blood. But she had married a man who understood that sentiment and business occupy different rooms, and sometimes you have to close the door between them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“We foreclose,” she said. The frail, unconfident woman from the church social has been replaced with a smooth and steady woman who can handle difficult situations.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">William pulled out a sheet of paper and began drafting the letter. Lottie sat beside him and watched him write. Neither of them was happy about it. But they were together in it, which was the only thing that had ever mattered to either of them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William set the pen down and slid the letter across the desk. Lottie read it. She read it a second time. Then she pulled it closer, picked up the pen, and signed her name beneath William’s.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Her hand was steady. The letters were careful and even. Charlotte Boog. Her married name on a foreclosure notice addressed to her own blood.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She set the pen down. She looked at the letter. The ink was still wet. It was the language of business, the language of a door closing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William stood. He touched her shoulder once and left the room. He knew when to stay and when to go. He had learned this from Mary. He went to the front porch and stood there with his hands in his pockets and gave Lottie the room.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Lottie sat at the desk. The house was quiet. The children were asleep. The lamp threw a circle of yellow light across the letter and her hands and the grain of the desk.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She had given them the house. After Valentin died, when the estate was settled and the Kansas property was hers outright, she had offered it to her brother James and his family. Below market. Generous terms. Because they were her people and her father had taught her that family was the one investment that could not fail.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Her father had been wrong about that.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She sat at the desk for a long time. She did not cry. She did not stand up and begin the next task. She sat with her hands flat on the wood and her eyes on the letter. The place in her chest where trust and belief had been was hollow now. The belief that if you managed everything correctly with the force of your own competence, then the people you trusted would not let you down.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">That place had a hole in it now. She could feel the draft.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She folded the letter. She addressed the envelope. She sealed it and set it on the stack for the morning post.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She did not tell William what it had cost her. He knew anyway.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c20">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The telephone arrived on a Tuesday in March. Not in the Boog house. In the McCarthy's house next door. Frank McCarthy was a clerk at the railroad office and had been talking about the telephone exchange for weeks. He truly believed he was witnessing the future. His wife Olga had been less certain. She told Lottie she would have preferred a new stove.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Lottie came home from visiting the McCarthys and found William in his study going over property contracts.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"The McCarthys have a telephone."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Good for the McCarthys."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Olga says you can talk to someone in Saint Paul. Right from the kitchen."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"You can talk to someone in Saint Paul by writing them a letter and waiting a week. What's the hurry?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Paul says he can call the railroad office and find out if a shipment arrived without leaving his house."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William set down his pen. "A man should know if his shipment arrived by going to the station and looking at it with his own eyes."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Lottie leaned against the doorframe. She had a look on her face that William had learned to recognize. It was the look she wore when she had already decided something and was simply waiting for him to catch up.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"I told Olga we would come over and try it."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Absolutely not."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Tomorrow at noon."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c53">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The McCarthy kitchen smelled like bread and dish soap. The telephone sat on a small shelf near the window. It was a wooden box with a cone-shaped mouthpiece on the front and a separate earpiece attached by a cord. A crank handle protruded from the right side. William stood three feet away from it with his arms crossed and studied it as if it were a piece of machinery that might be dangerous.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Frank stood beside it with the pride of a man showing off a new horse. "You turn the crank. That rings the operator. You tell her the number you want and she connects you."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"You tell a woman?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"The operator. She's at the exchange office. She plugs the wires together."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Plugs the wires." William repeated this slowly. He looked at Lottie. She looked back at him with an expression of mild amusement and total patience.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Who do I get connected with?" William asked.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Call my office. She will ask for your number. Say 714. Jackson will answer. Just say hello."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William stepped up to the telephone. He examined the crank. Gave it a turn. A faint ringing sound came from somewhere inside the box. He leaned into the mouthpiece and waited.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">A tinny voice came through the earpiece. William picked it up and held it to his ear.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Number please."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Seven fourteen," William says loudly.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">A series of clicks. Then a voice. Distant and mechanical, like a person speaking from the bottom of a well.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"McCarthy and Associates. Jackson speaking."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William leaned into the mouthpiece. His instinct told him what his instinct always told him. That sound travels by force. That if you want someone to hear you across a city, you have to project. The same principle as calling across a jobsite or shouting down a hall. Volume. Authority. Lung power. This was a soup can and strings across town.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He filled his chest with air and bellowed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"HELLO, JACKSON. THIS IS WILLIAM BOOG. I AM AT THE MCCARTHY RESIDENCE. CAN YOU HEAR ME?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The force of it rattled the shelf. Olga McCarthy dropped a spoon. Frank winced. In the other room, Charlotte and Louise stopped what they were doing. In the yard, Alex looked up from his dirt pile.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">A long pause from the earpiece. Then Jackson's voice, small and careful. "I can hear you fine, sir. You don't have to shout."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William looked at the earpiece as though it had insulted him. He leaned back into the mouthpiece.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"I AM NOT SHOUTING. I AM SPEAKING CLEARLY SO THAT MY VOICE CARRIES THE DISTANCE."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">In the doorway, Charlotte and Louise were pressing their hands over their mouths. Their eyes were wet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"JACKSON, CAN YOU HEAR ME NOW?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Mr. Boog. I heard you the first time. You can speak normally."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William straightened. He adjusted his collar. He spoke into the mouthpiece at a slightly reduced volume that was still twice as loud as any person had ever spoken into a telephone in the state of Minnesota.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"I don't trust this contraption, Jackson. Tell Frank his machine works. Good day."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He hung the earpiece on its hook. He turned to the room. Every person in it was in some stage of concealed hysteria. Lottie's hand was over her mouth. Her eyes gave her away.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"What?" William said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Nothing," Lottie said. Her voice was strained. "Nothing at all."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She stepped past him. She picked up the earpiece and cranked the handle. The operator connected her. She spoke into the mouthpiece in a calm, conversational voice.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Hello, Jackson. This is Charlotte Boog. Yes, I apologize for the volume. Could you tell me whether the shipment from Duluth has arrived at the yard?" A pause. "Wonderful. Thank you. Have a pleasant afternoon."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She hung the earpiece. She turned to William. He was staring at her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"That's all you do?" he said. "You just talk? Regular voice?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Regular voice."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"But how does it carry? There's no power behind it. It's a wire, Lottie. A wire doesn't carry a voice from here to Saint Paul without force."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"And yet it does."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William looked at the telephone. He looked at Lottie. He looked at the telephone again. His brow tightened. He was processing something that did not fit into any of the categories his mind had built over fifty-eight years of understanding how the physical world operated.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"I don't like it," he said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"You don't have to like it. You just have to use it."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"The thing is broken. It shouldn't work that way."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"It isn't broken. You were the loudest thing in the room."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Olga McCarthy finally burst. The laugh she had been holding came out in a single bark that she immediately covered with her hand. Frank coughed into his fist.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William looked at the assembled witnesses to his humiliation. He straightened his vest. He smoothed his mustache. He produced a grin, the same grin he had used to sell boots on Aston's Quay and negotiate contracts on Summit Avenue. The grin of a man who knows when he is beaten and chooses to make it look deliberate.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Well," he said, "if the whole city heard that, at least they know the name Boog."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c53">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">That evening William sat on the back steps of the Dayton Avenue house. The sun was going down over the western roofline. Lottie came out and sat beside him. She had a cup of tea. He had nothing. His hands were between his knees.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"It's a useful thing, William. The telephone. For the business."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"I know it is."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"We could have one installed. Frank says the cost is manageable."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Let me think on it."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She drank her tea. He watched the sunset.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He was quiet for a long time. When he spoke his voice was lower. Smaller than it had been in the McCarthy kitchen.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"The world is speeding up, Lottie. Electric lights on the roads. Streetcars running without horses. Black discs that play music when a needle goes across them. Now a box on the wall that carries your voice across the city." He paused. "I've spent my entire life using my hands and my voice to build things. Walk up to a man. Shake his hand. Look him in the eye. That's how I got every contract I ever won. Every property I ever bought. Will those days change?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He looked at his hands. They had built everything he owned and held everything he had lost.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"That world is getting smaller. The one where a man does business with his hands and his word."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Lottie was quiet. She understood him. She had seen the same shift. She had adapted to it faster than he had, because adaptation was what her Kansas upbringing had trained her for. But she understood why it cost him something.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Nothing is stopping you. You can continue to do business with your hands and your word." she said. Not pushing. Offering.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William looked at her. She met his eyes and held them. He did the smallest ‘no’ gesture with his head and looks down. He looks back up and she is still locking eyes with him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The sun dropped below the roofline. The backyard went to shadow. Somewhere inside the house, one of the children laughed. William sat on the steps with his hands between his knees.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The world changed around him. The feeling he got when Rose left came back to him. He tried to avoid it by inflating his own ego. He thought about how far he came. He thought about Dublin, the famine, the damp, deaths in Boston. About how people laughed at his name. Instead of an exercise in seeing how far he has come, we was staring at ghosts of his past. An unsettled grunt precursored him placing his hands on his knees to assist himself up. He went inside to try and take his mind elsewhere.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>