<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c17">
      <span class="c38">Chapter Ten</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c46 c31">Welcome to America. Next!</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c34">
      <span class="c1">The cavernous rotunda of Castle Garden swallowed them whole.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The noise was overwhelming. Multiple languages at once, crying babies, shouting officials, the shuffle of thousands of feet on stone floors. Immigrants moved through lines that seemed to lead nowhere and everywhere at the same time. The air was thick with humidity and the sour smell of people who had not bathed in weeks.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The Boog family waited. The children sat on the trunk. Teresa had fallen asleep against Letitia, her small body curled sideways and perfectly trusting. Austin watched a German family arguing with an official, their hands flying, their voices rising. Mary Margaret held her mother’s hand and did not let go.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">When they reached the front of the line, a processing clerk sat behind a small table with a ledger open and a pen in his hand. He did not look up.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Destination?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“New York or Boston,” William said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Work?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I was a bootmaker. Now looking for laborer work, perhaps a painter.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Laborer it is.” The clerk still had not raised his eyes. “Got any money?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“What do you want with my money?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The clerk looked up for the first time. His expression was flat. The face of a man who had asked these same questions since morning and would ask them again until dark.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Your pounds are useless here. Hand over your money and we’ll convert it to real American money, or step aside and go play with your fantasy money.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William hesitated. He reached into his coat, slowly, and produced the remainder of his savings. He placed it on the table. The clerk counted it, scratched a number in the ledger, and pushed a small pile of American bills and coins back across the surface.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“After conversion you get fifty one dollars and twenty cents. Welcome to America.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The stamp came down. The clerk was already calling for the next in line before the ink was dry.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A clerk processed the Boog family into America in under two minutes.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Outside the depot, chaos wore a different face. Runners, hustlers, and con men circled the dazed immigrants like gulls around a fishing boat. Signs in six languages advertised boarding houses, train tickets, labor agents. Hands grabbed at sleeves. Voices called out promises in accents from every corner of Europe.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William pushed through the crowd, away from the hundreds of Irish who had been on that ship. He found himself surrounded by voices and accents he had never heard. He nodded at anyone who looked his way. Hat tips everywhere. “How do you do?” “Afternoon, sir.” He watched the Americans greet each other and joined in. Mary and the children watched him do it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c34">
      <span class="c1">During these moments, with one hand on the trunk, the other reaching back to keep Mary close, a hand grabbed his arm. William turned, fist ready. But the man who held him was Irish. Broad-faced, missing teeth, wearing a well worn coat. His accent was pure Cork, softened by years in America.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Easy, brother. I can hear the Dublin on ya from ten feet away. Just off the boat?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“What’s it to you?” William kept his fist half-raised.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Nothing to me, I come in peace. God and Mary be with you.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The Cork man released his arm and stepped back, palms open, showing he meant no harm. William shoots a brief look, ‘don’t give me this God business’.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You stood out to me. Lovely family you’ve got. I was you, four years ago. Standing right where you’re standing with the same look on my face.” “Listen. You a tradesman?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Bootmaker. But I can work with my hands.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Forget boots. Nobody needs another cobbler.” The man leaned in and lowered his voice, not out of secrecy but out of something closer to kindness. “You want to eat? Boston. House painting. The Irish have the trade sewn up. Every house, every church, every schoolhouse. You show up, you say you can paint, someone will put a brush in your hand by morning.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William looked at Mary. She stood behind him holding the baby, surrounded by children, standing in the middle of a country she had never seen. She gave him the smallest nod. Wherever you go, I go.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“How do I get there?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Grand Central Station. That’s where you need to go. Get on the train to Boston. It’ll take you six, seven hours. $5.20 per passenger, they may cut a deal for your little ones.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William reached into his coat and counted the American bills. The arithmetic was quick and grim. </span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I can afford it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Good man.” The Cork man clapped his shoulder. “Prince Street, the North End. Ask for any Irishman. They’ll sort you. May the Lord keep you in the hollow of His hand.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He disappeared into the crowd. William watched him go, then turned to his family.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Boston.”</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>