<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c17">
      <span>Chapter Twenty-Six</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c31 c46">Complicated Arithmetic</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">They married in the spring of 1891 at the Cathedral of downtown Saint Paul. The much larger cathedral was still under construction.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The cathedral stood as a sturdy, elegant sentinel at the corner of 6th and St. Peter. While its stone walls didn't reach the dizzying heights of a modern skyscraper, its limestone facade offered a sense of permanence in a fast-growing frontier town. Inside, the light filtered through stained glass to pool on the wooden pews. The cathedral didn't seek to overwhelm a person with its scale, but rather to cradle them in a dignity that felt worlds away from the muddy streets of St. Paul.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William stood at the altar in his best coat and looked up at the windows and the light pouring through them and he thought of another church. St. Michael and John’s in Dublin. The narrow stained glass. The nearly empty pews. Mary walked up the aisle in a dress that was not new and not white, with wildflowers at her collar. The cobblestone kind that grew through cracks in stone. No music. No rings. A priest who had done it a hundred times and could not be bothered to care. The distance between that wedding and this one was the distance he had traveled in his life.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Lottie wore a simple dress. No white. She was a widow remarrying and she carried that with dignity. Her eyes were bright and certain. She had chosen this man. Not because she needed saving but because she recognized something in him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The children sat in the front pew. Mary Margaret had tears in her eyes. Complicated tears. Letitia squeezed her hand. Rose held a flower she was supposed to throw but had decided to keep. Lottie’s brood intermingled with the children.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The priest read the vows. William held Lottie’s hands and meant every word. He had done this before, in Dublin, with a girl from the wash house. That marriage was forged in desperation and love. This one was forged in survival and choice.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">They kissed. Brief and honest. They pulled back and looked each other in the eye. The cathedral applauded. They followed up with another brief kiss, then William overwhelmed her with a strong and tight hug. The applause continued.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">That following night, the house was quiet. Lottie was asleep. William sat at the kitchen table with the paper unfolded in front of him. The left half was full. MARY X at the top, and below her the column of children, five X’s scattered among the names like wounds.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He turned the paper slightly and looked at the right half. Blank. It had been blank since Dublin. Twenty-seven years of emptiness on the other side of the crease. William had always feared that death would follow him to the right side of that paper. In fact, it was the opposite.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He picked up the pen. On the right half, at the top, he wrote: CHARLOTTE.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He looked at what he had done. Two names at the top of a folded piece of paper. One on the left. One on the right. One with an X. One without. Two wives. One crease between them. The paper held them both. Not in competition. Not in rank. But side by side, separated by a fold that was also a bridge.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He stared at it for a long time. Then he folded the paper carefully along the same crease and put it away. He smacked his breast pocket with two loud whacks, and moved on.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The marriage brought arithmetic that no one had prepared for. William’s three girls. Lottie’s six. The Evergreen Avenue house, which had felt spacious when it held one family, now buckled under the weight of two. Six rooms and a barn for nine children. Bedrooms doubled up. Hallways became obstacle courses. Breakfast was a military exercise. Lottie’s children arrived with their own rhythms, their own noise, their own way of opening cabinets and slamming doors, and William’s children watched them settle in with the careful wariness of animals adjusting to a new herd.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Lottie drew up the sleeping arrangements on a piece of butcher paper she spread across the kitchen table. She assigned beds by age and temperament. Her own girls shared the east bedroom. William’s girls took the west. The boys occupied the half-storey above. She posted the arrangement on the inside of the pantry door where everyone could see it. Below the sleeping chart she added a chore rotation. Each child’s name followed by their daily task. The tasks rotated weekly. No one was exempt. No one was favoured.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Her principle was simple. Everyone contributed. Everyone ate. Everyone was treated the same regardless of which parent they had arrived with. She enforced this with a quiet firmness that the children learned not to test.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mornings were the hardest. Nine children needed to be fed and dressed and directed toward school or chores before eight o’clock. Lottie was a field general.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William observed this operation from the doorway with his coffee and a look that combined admiration with mild terror. He had run painting crews of a dozen men. He had never seen anyone manage nine children before breakfast with less visible effort. Lottie did it while simultaneously packing three lunches and answering a question about algebra and reminding someone to water the garden. She did not raise her voice. She did not need to.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">It lasted nine days.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">On the tenth morning Lottie came downstairs and found the chore chart torn from the pantry door. The paper lay on the kitchen floor, ripped through the middle. One half still held the tack. The other half was crumpled near the stove.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She picked up both halves. She held them together. The tear ran through the center column, splitting the names. Her children on one side. William’s on the other.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She did not know who had done it. She did not ask. She stood in the kitchen holding the two halves of paper and studied the tear. Clean. Deliberate. Someone had used both hands.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The first week had been noise, adjustment, the ordinary friction of too many bodies in too few rooms. This was different. This was someone saying no. Not to the chart. To her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">That evening she sat on the edge of the bed in the room she shared with William. The door was closed. The children were in the kitchen, loud, arguing about something she could not make out through the wall. She sat with her hands in her lap and the torn chart on the bed beside her and she did not know what to do next.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She had managed six children alone for three years. She had kept the house, paid the bills, buried a husband and started over in a new city. She had never lost control of a room. She had never had a system fail.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William found her there. He came in and saw her sitting on the bed and the chart beside her and he stopped in the doorway.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Lottie?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Someone tore it down.” Her voice was flat. “I don’t know who. I don’t know why. I have been here ten days and I have fed every child in this house the same portions from the same pot and treated every one of them as mine and someone tore it down.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William looked at the chart. He looked at his wife.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Don’t put it back up,” he said. “Let the house sort itself out. Mary never had a chart. She just showed up every morning and fought through it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Lottie looked at him. Her face went still.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I am not Mary.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The words impacted harder than she intended. Or maybe exactly as hard as she intended. William’s mouth closed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I did not come into this house to become another woman. I came in as myself. I brought my children and my way of doing things and I hung that chart on the door because it is how I know how to keep a household from falling apart.” She picked up the torn halves and held them in front of her. “Someone tore this down. That is not a sign that I should stop. That is a sign that I need to do it differently.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William sat beside her. He was quiet. He tried to offer advice but that failed. His chest tightened. He resorted to just looking at her, letting her take the next step.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Lottie looked at the two halves. She turned them over. She studied the tear line. Then she stood, went to the kitchen, and came back with a fresh sheet of butcher paper and a pencil.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She sat at the small desk in their bedroom and did not make a chart. She made a different thing. Not assignments. Pairs. She put one of her children beside one of William’s for each task. Not by command. By partnership. Anetta with Rose on dishes. Mary Margaret with her son Joseph on firewood. The pairs were deliberate. She matched children who had not yet spoken ten words to each other and gave them a shared job that required cooperation.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She posted it on the pantry door the next morning without announcement. The children read it. Mary Margaret looked at Joseph. Joseph looked at her. Neither protested. The structure was too clever to argue with. It did not feel like an order. It felt like it had been their idea.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">By the end of the month the pairs had become friendships. William’s girls helped Lottie's children with school situations and friendship advice. Lottie’s kids helped integrate the Boog girls more tightly into Minnesota society. Lottie’s system held because it was built on the thing she understood better than anyone in that house: we’re in this together.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She had not become Mary. She had not abandoned the chart. She had made something new, and the family that grew inside it was hers.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">That fall they walked two lots on Roblyn Avenue on an afternoon when the elms along the boulevard had gone gold and rust, the last good color before the branches went bare. The lots were modest. Flat, grassy, bordered on one side by a gravel alley where a delivery wagon sat with its horse blanketed against the chill. Down the block, a crew was laying new water mains, the trench cut into the packed earth, clay pipes stacked at the curb.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William watched the pipe crew work. He understood what fresh water mains meant. Where the pipes went, the families followed. Where the families went, the houses went. He could read a city.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He bought them. Lottie’s name on the deed, as it was on all the deeds now. She had taken over the paperwork without being asked, the way she took over everything that needed organizing. He found the land. She kept the records. Neither of them had discussed the arrangement. It had simply grown between them, practical and solid, requiring no ceremony.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">It was Lottie who found the family home. She did not ask William’s permission. She walked him past a house on Dayton Avenue near the corner of Snelling on a Sunday afternoon and stopped on the sidewalk and waited.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Shortly after, William sold the Evergreen house. He wrote the listing himself at the kitchen table while the house slept, his handwriting tight and deliberate. He carried it to the Globe offices the next morning. The clerk at the advertising desk was the same man who had taken William’s first painter’s notice years earlier, though his hair had thinned and his collar had yellowed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Selling this time, Mr. Boog?” The clerk did not look up from his ledger.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William set the card on the counter and watched the man copy it into the ledger. The pen scratched across the page and with each word the house passed out of him. The barn he had wanted to build first. The garden on the south side where Rose had picked flowers and tucked them behind her mother’s ear. Mary’s window, the one she had opened on the first day and breathed through with her eyes closed. All of it, reduced to column inches. He paid for a week’s run, pocketed the receipt, and walked out into a morning where the new electric streetcar hummed past on its overhead wire, throwing blue sparks at the contact point. He did not linger. He had built the place, lived in it, lost Mary in it. Nine children needed more room than sentiment could provide.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The new house was a proper single-family home on a proper street. Not a tenement, not a dead-end court, not a narrow shopfront with rooms above. A Queen Anne with clapboard siding and a wide front porch, the kind of house that architects were putting up along the better avenues. Real rooms. A garden. Windows that looked out onto boulevard elms instead of brick. A cast-iron coal furnace in the basement, which meant no more feeding a wood stove at three in the morning. William stood on the sidewalk and felt something he rarely allowed himself to feel. Comfort. The sense that a place could hold him without needing to be outgrown.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“This is it,” he said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I know,” Lottie said. “I already spoke with the seller.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Of course you did.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">They moved before the first snow. Lottie had already arranged the price. Lottie’s name on the deed, as William often did. The children flooded the house and filled it. Lottie hung curtains. William stood in the front doorway with his hands in his pockets and watched her arranging a life around him, draping fabric over rods, straightening frames on walls. The house on Dayton Avenue smelled like fresh paint and something from Lottie’s kitchen that he could not identify but wanted more of.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">On winter evenings, after the children were in bed, William spread his papers across the kitchen table. He sips a small glass of whiskey that he doesn’t finish. The taste burns on the first sip. On his follow up sips, he could taste the oak from the barrels that the whiskey was made in. The kerosene lamp burned low and his shadow filled the wall behind him. Deeds. Plat maps. A numbness in his mouth. Mortgage documents with the county clerk’s red stamps in the corners. He ran his finger down the columns of street names and lot numbers, checking figures he had already checked, confirming what did not need confirming.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The holdings had multiplied. A lot here, two there, a parcel sold at profit and the money rolled into the next purchase before the ink dried on the receipt. He bought along corridors. Carroll Avenue. Dayton Avenue. Roblyn. He stacked properties on the same streets and put them in family names. Adjacent lots so he could control who lived beside his people. The pattern was deliberate. A man who had grown up in a tenement room twelve feet square, who had watched landlords raise rent on dying families, was building a wall of ownership around everyone he loved. The deeds were the wall. The dirt beneath them was the foundation. Dirt did not get sick. Dirt did not swell with fluid. Dirt stayed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William had purchased a small house on Carroll Avenue and put it in Letitia’s name. She had been at the Sisters for over a decade. The house was his way of offering her a path back. A deed with her name on it. A garden. A room of her own. Letitia thanked him. She visited the house once. She did not move in.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William did not feel triumph when he signed a new deed. He had felt that once, the first time, when the partnership sign went up on Seventh Street and his name was on a building in America. He had felt it again when he built the house on Evergreen and Mary leaned into the light at the window. Those purchases had meant arrival. These meant something else. Each signature was a small, private act of insurance against a loss he could not name and could not stop expecting. He bought property the way another man might drink. Not for the pleasure of it. For the brief absence of dread.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Lottie leaned in the doorway one evening while he worked through a stack of deeds. “You know, most painters just paint.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Most painters work for someone else,” William said without looking up.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">One afternoon in the early fall of 1890, Letitia came home from the Sisters for a visit. William found her on the back porch with Rose, a jar of water between them and brushes spread on the boards. Rose had a scrap of butcher paper pinned under a rock. Letitia had a board propped on her knees and a saucer of pigment mixed from the set she had brought from the conservatory. They were painting the elm at the back of the yard.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Rose worked fast, her brush loaded with too much water, the color bleeding past every line she tried to hold. Green pooled in the corners. She wiped at it with her thumb and made it worse.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Letitia painted the same tree the way she had been taught at the conservatory. Small, deliberate strokes. Leaf by leaf. Branch by branch. She tested each shade on her fingertip before she touched the board. The colors were mixed with a precision that came from years of practice, not from instinct.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You’re going to be here until Christmas,” Rose said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“And yours will be dry by then, which is a mercy. Nobody should have to look at it wet.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Rose gasped in mock offense. Then she leaned over and flicked water off her brush onto Letitia’s board. A spray of droplets landed across the careful leaves.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Letitia studied the damage. She tilted her head. “That’s actually better. It looks like rain.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I am improving your art.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You are a menace.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">They painted until the light dropped and the elm became a silhouette. Rose held up her version. The tree looked like it had been caught in a flood. Letitia held up hers. The leaves were precise, individual, each one a slightly different green. The water spots Rose had added looked like morning dew.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“We should do this more,” Rose said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Letitia cleaned her brush in the jar. The water turned a deep olive. “We should.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William watched them from the kitchen window. He had never seen Letitia sit still that long for anything except prayer and gardening. The brush in her hand looked natural there. Like it had been waiting for her to pick it up.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>