<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
        <h2 class="c17">
      <span class="c38">Chapter Nine</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c46 c31">The hold with blinking creatures</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c34">
      <span class="c1">Darkness. Then the sound.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">It came from everywhere at once, a low, constant groan of timber and iron as the ship moaned against the sea. Water dripped from the ceiling in steady, patient drops that found the back of a neck, the edge of a blanket, the bridge of a sleeping child’s nose. Coughing echoed through the hold. Whimpering. The muttered cadence of a man praying in Irish Gaelic somewhere in the dark.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The smell was the first thing you noticed. Unwashed bodies, bilge water, vomit, and something older that clung to the wood from every crossing before this one. The smell of human cargo, repeated and absorbed into the grain of the ship itself.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Steerage was a long, low hold divided by rough wooden bunks stacked three high. Hundreds of people packed together because that is, functionally, what they were. Families huddled in tight clusters. A child cried somewhere far down the row. A woman retched into a bucket. The bucket was already full.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The Boog family occupied a middle bunk. Mary lay on her back with one arm around Teresa, who was small enough to tuck against her ribs. Her other hand rested on her pregnant belly, the slight new bump pressing against the fabric of her dress. Her face was a mask of endurance. The older children pressed together in the bunk like a litter of pups. Austin, six, had his arm slung across Mary Margaret, five. Letitia, four, slept with a smile and calmness on her face.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William sat on the edge of the bunk, awake. His boots were off because there was nowhere to go. He stared into the dark hold, watching the shapes of eight hundred other human beings who had made the same impossible bet he did. His mouth was a tight line. He did not look afraid. He looked like a man running numbers he already knew the answer to.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The ship pitched. Everything slid. A tin cup rolled across the floor with a high, wandering note. A woman gasped. The timbers screamed in their joints.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William steadied his family with one hand against the upper frame, the other braced against the bunk rail. Mary Margaret’s eyes found his in the dark. He gave her the smallest nod. She closed her eyes.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The crossing unfolded in fragments. There was no narrative to it, no arc, no beginning and middle and end. There were only days, each one indistinguishable from the last, counted not by sunrise but by the quality of the light that filtered through the hatch.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Dawn. William carried Austin up the narrow steps to the deck. The boy’s eyes went wide at the sight of the open ocean. Water in every direction. No land. No end. No edge. Just the gray Atlantic rolling toward a horizon that never arrived. William held his son and said nothing. What would he say?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Below, Mary distributed hardtack, porridge and water to the children. She broke the biscuit into precisely equal pieces with her rough hands. Letitia gave half of hers to Teresa without being asked. Mary saw this and her eyes welled up, but she turned away before anyone noticed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A storm came on the fourth night. The crew sealed the hatch and steerage became a coffin. The ship rolled until the world tilted sideways and the screaming started. Buckets overturned. Children wailed. In the chaos, William braced his family in the bunk with his body. Arms spread, back pressed against the upper frame, his legs locked against the rail. A human wall between his children and the pitching dark. Mary held the little ones against her chest and closed her eyes. She waited for it to pass or to kill them. It passed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The calm sea returned. Fresh air and color poured through the open hatch and reached down into the hold like a hand. Austin couldn’t resist and with William’s permission, he headed above. Austin sat on deck with his legs dangling over the edge, watching the wake trail behind the ship in a white road that dissolved into blue. He was six years old and the world he knew had disappeared. He did not know that yet. He only knew the water was very blue.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Night again. The hold had a rhythm now. The sick coughed. The well slept. The ship groaned underneath all of it. Mary lay awake and took William’s hand and pressed it to her belly. He felt the baby kick. In this terrible place, in the stinking dark of a ship’s bottom, new life insisted on itself.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William lay in the bunk with his eyes open, looking up through the hatch at a stripe of night sky. Stars. The first clear night in weeks. His hand moved to his breast pocket. The paper was there, damp from the crossing, softening at the crease, but there. His lips moved in the dark. It’s doubtful he was praying to God. But he was saying something when no one was around. He might have been counting. He might have been reading names to the stars.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">On the ninth morning, the hatch opened and passengers surged onto the deck, blinking like creatures emerging from underground.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">And there it was.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">New York. The harbor was a forest of masts and smokestacks. Castle Garden loomed on the shore. And beyond it, the city itself, a jagged, impossible skyline that looked nothing like anything these people had ever seen. Brick and stone and iron, packed tight along the shore, the buildings crowding each other for room. Immense and indifferent and unlike any place on earth they had been taught to imagine.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William stood at the rail with his family. Mary stared with her mouth open. The children crowded against the gunwale railing of the boat deck, craning to see. Even Austin, who had been quiet for days, was wide-eyed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Around them, other passengers wept. Men performed the sign of the cross. Women fell to their knees. A woman held her baby up toward the shore. The baby squinted against the light.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William did not weep. He watched. His eyes moved across the skyline, the docks, the chaos of arrival, sizing it up the way he had once sized up a street in Dublin. Looking for the angle. The opening. The place where a man could plant his feet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Mother of God,” Mary whispered.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“We’re not staying here,” William said. His voice was steady. “This is the door. Not the house.”</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>