<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c54"><span class="c44">Chapter Thirteen</span></h2>
    <p class="c59">
      <span class="c35 c31">Something in the Water</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c43 c32">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary was in labor again. By now she was a seasoned veteran. The pain, the waiting, the final terrible push. A neighbor woman helped. The older children had been sent to the hallway.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">They lined up on the stairs outside the door. Austin, Mary Margaret, Letitia, Teresa. They sat in a row, listening. Austin put his arm around Teresa. The younger ones did not fully understand what was happening on the other side of that door. Austin did.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">A baby’s cry came from inside the room. The children looked at each other. Letitia beamed ear to ear.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William entered the room a moment later. Mary held the newborn, a boy. She was exhausted but present. This was her seventh delivery. Her body knew the cost even if her face would not show it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Joseph,” she said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William sat beside her. He touched the baby’s face. He pressed his thumb against the boy’s palm and gently squeezed. The boy squeezed back.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Welcome, Joseph,” he said quietly.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He kissed Mary’s forehead. She closed her eyes. For a moment everything was still.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William glanced over by the doorway. Letitia beamed a smile with her eyes shut, and a wet line down her cheek. He paused. Teresa wore a flower in her hair.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">That night, after Mary had fallen asleep, William took the paper from his breast pocket and unfolded it at the kitchen table. The crease was deeper now. The Atlantic crossing had softened the paper. On the left half, under MARY: George X. Austin. Mary. Letitia. Teresa. William X. He wrote Joseph beneath them. Seven children under Mary’s name. Still only two Xs. He refolded the paper and put it back. </span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">All five children were in the tenement on a cool afternoon, the noise of them filling the rooms to the rafters. Austin and Mary Margaret nominated themselves as leaders.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“We’re going to play London Bridge.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“London Bridge is broken down, broken down, broken down...”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Ma, what’s after that?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“We used to call it High Gates. You bring your arms down on ‘my fair lady’ and capture whoever is underneath.” She proceeds to grab and squeeze Mary Margaret in a playful manner.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Austin brightened. “Then you build it with iron and steel, keep building the bridge with materials, until you capture everybody!”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Precisely. Then you have teams for your next game.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Like Tug of War!”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William called from the doorway. “Be gentle. Don’t be breaking anything.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary touched his arm and nodded toward the door. They left Austin and Mary Margaret in charge.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">They walked the streets of the North End, side by side, as they had once walked Michael’s Lane in Dublin. Mary spoke first.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“How often do you think of Ireland?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Let’s start with you,” William said. “How often do you think of Ireland?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Every day. Of course it’s every day.” She pulled her shawl tighter against the Boston wind. “I have family there. We started this life out of nothing there. We buried our son there. We found success there. The atmosphere, the rain, the Liberties, the Liffey. It was a way of life. This is a big change.” She paused. “I do miss my sisters and brother.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William was quiet for a long time. They walked half a block before Mary nudged him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I answered. Now it’s your turn.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I’ve never really been one to look backwards,” he said. “Never had a reason to. I’ve always looked at what’s ahead of me.” He shoved his hands into his pockets. “I do think of Doyle every now and then. Wondering if he’d be proud of me.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary took his hand. They walked on together, their voices dropping to a murmur as the streets of Boston carried on around them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary walked down Prince Street one morning with Joseph in her arms, a basket in the other hand. She stopped at the water pump shared by the block and worked the handle with her free arm. The water came out cloudy. She looked at it. In Dublin, bad water was a known enemy. Here it wore a different disguise.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She carried on to a milk vendor. A man sold from a large can on a cart. Mary bought a measure. She sniffed it. Something was off. She looked at the vendor.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“This is fresh?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Fresh enough,” the man said, already turning to the next customer.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary looked at the milk. Looked at Joseph. She needed to feed her children. She paid and walked home.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Behind her, the water pump dripped.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary kept a close eye on the children, including Joseph, to make sure they stayed healthy.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Seven months later Joseph lay in a makeshift crib, burning with fever. His tiny body shivered and sweated at the same time. His crying had become a weak, constant mewling, the sound of a baby who was losing the strength to scream.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary held a damp cloth to his forehead. Her hands were shaking. Not from cold.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William paced the room. He had already been to find a doctor, who did not need much time to look at Joseph. The doctor touched his skin and shook his head. William tracked him down in the hallway and they talked quietly. He did not want the children to hear. There was nothing to be done. The doctor said he dealt with infant and young child death all too often in this neighborhood. Said it without flinching, like a man reporting the weather. Cholera.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“There must be another doctor,” he said. “That man was a fraud. We need another opinion. I don’t care if I don’t have the money today. Let’s take him to the church. Maybe they can help. Somebody has to know someone. Somehow, we have to find someone who...”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Stop!” Mary said it sharp and without looking up. Her voice stopped him like a hand on his chest.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William stopped. He looked at his wife. She was holding their dying child. The other children were in the next room. They could hear everything.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Sit with us,” she said. Controlled. Barely.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William’s eyes welled up as he sat down beside her. He put his hand on Joseph’s chest. The baby’s heartbeat was fast and faint.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">In the hallway, the other children sat in silence. Letitia had her arm around Teresa, calm. Austin stared at the floor. Mary Margaret pressed her face into Austin’s shoulder so she could not see.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Behind the closed door, the mewling grew quieter. Then stopped.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">A long silence. Then Mary’s voice, a single raw sound that she caught almost immediately and stuffed back down. And then nothing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Joseph was only 7 months old when he passed away.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William stood rigid at St. Mary’s Church, his arm around Mary, who was perfectly still and perfectly upright. She could not afford to be any other way.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William lingered after the others had moved away. He stood alone, staring at the ground.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I brought you all this way,” he said. Barely audible.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He could not finish the thought. He put his hat on and walked away. Austin was fresh on his mind again.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The tenement was hot and still. Late August, and the air in the rooms had thickened into something that clung to skin and clothes and would not move. The windows were open but nothing came through them. From the hallway, the smell of every family on the floor: boiled cabbage, tallow, sweat, the sour tang of waste from the shared privy in the yard below. Mary sat in the chair by the stove, upright, awake, staring at the wall. She had not moved since they came back from St. Mary’s. She had not spoken. William did not try to make her. He waited until the children were asleep. Then he pulled the paper from his breast pocket and unfolded it on the table. No candle. The room held enough light from the street, a thin grey beam through the window that turned the ink on the paper to shadow. Joseph. The newest name. The freshest ink.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He picked up the pen. His hand did not want to do this. His hand knew what the X meant. It meant the name was finished. The story was over. The boy was in the ground in a city that did not feel like home. He wrote the X after Joseph. Small. Deliberate. Another son.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">George X. William X. Joseph X.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Three X’s now. Three small crosses on the left half of a piece of paper. He folded it and put it back in his breast pocket. The paper wasn't as stiff anymore as William’s body heat had softened it over the years. It held its own shape.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>