<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c20">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c17">
      <span class="c38">Chapter Thirty-One</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c46 c31">A clearing in the woods</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">It started in the kitchen on a Sunday.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">The whole family was at the table. Charlotte and Louise on one side, Virginia in the high chair with porridge on her chin, Alex on Lottie’s lap pulling at her collar. Letitia was able to come over for dinner. Lottie was cutting bread and answering three questions at once. Charlotte wanted to know if she could have more butter. Louise had spilled her milk and was pretending she hadn’t. Virginia banged her spoon against the tray and laughed at the sound it made.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">William sat at the head of the table. His plate was full. He had not touched it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">The room was loud. Not unpleasantly loud. The ordinary noise of a family eating together, forks and voices, a baby’s spoon and the creak of chairs, someone’s elbow bumping a glass. Seven people in a room built for less. Bodies close. The air was warm from the stove and the breathing and the steam rising off the potatoes.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">William looked down the table. He looked at every face. Charlotte leaning over her plate, already bossy about the butter. Louise sideways in her chair hiding the milk. Virginia, oblivious, electric with her own noise. Alex gripping Lottie’s collar with a fist so small it couldn’t close all the way.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He saw them. All of them. Alive and loud and filling every corner of the room.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">His chest tightened.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Not gradually. All at once, like a strap cinching across his ribs. His breath caught. The room contracted. The walls came closer. The ceiling dropped. He could feel his heartbeat in his throat and his hands went flat against the table and pressed down and the grain of the wood was under his palms but the wood was not steady, the wood was moving, the whole room was moving, and the noise that had been ordinary was now unbearable, every voice a frequency he could not separate from the others.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He pushed his chair back. The scrape of it cut through the table noise and Charlotte looked up and Lottie looked up.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Excuse me,” William said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He walked out of the kitchen. Through the hall. Out the front door. Down the porch steps. He made it to the fence before he stopped and put both hands on the rail and leaned forward and tried to breathe.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">The evening air was cool. It smelled of cut grass and the neighbor’s lilac hedge. Normal smells. Safe smells. His body did not care. His lungs pulled short shallow gulps and his vision narrowed and his hands on the fence rail were white at the knuckles.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He stood there. A minute. Two. The tightness loosened by fractions. His breathing slowed. He straightened up. He wiped his face with his hand. His hand was wet. He had been sweating.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Behind him, the front door opened and closed. Footsteps on the porch. Letitia came down the steps and stood beside him at the fence. He did not speak. He stood there the way he stood at a job site when something had gone wrong and the foreman needed a minute.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I’m fine,” William said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I know you are.” She didn’t know how else to respond.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">They stood at the fence. Inside, the dinner noise resumed. Virginia’s spoon. Charlotte’s voice. Alex fussing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“When I look at them,” William said. He stopped. Started again. “When I look at them at that table I see every child I’ve buried. Every one. George and William in Dublin, Joseph, Austin, Teresa, in Boston, John, all of them. I look at Charlotte and I see Teresa. I look at Alex and I see John. The chair Louise is sitting in is the chair Austin sat in. They’re not the same children, I know that. But my mind doesn’t know it. My mind sees a full table and it counts the empty chairs from every table I’ve ever sat at and it puts them all in the same room.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He was still gripping the fence. His voice had dropped to a register his daughter had never heard from him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“A full table is the most dangerous thing in the world. Every seat is a seat that can go empty. I’ve watched it happen so many times that when I see a room full of people I love, I can’t see them as they are. I see them as they could be. Gone. And I’m still sitting there.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Letitia looked at her father. She did not offer comfort. She had learned from both her parents that comfort offered too quickly insults the pain.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“You don’t sleep. You need peace.” Letitia said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">William looked at her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Lottie told me. She said you wake up in the night and go downstairs and sit at the desk and don’t come back to bed.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">William said nothing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“She’s worried.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“She shouldn’t be.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Pa.” Letitia turned to face him. “She should be. You need peace.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">This was as bold of an invitation to faith as Letitia would offer. William let go of the fence. He stood straight. He smoothed his vest. He was composing himself after being challenged, and both of them knew it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Go back inside,” William said. “Tell them I needed air.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Letitia went. William stayed at the fence. The sun was low. The Dayton Avenue elms cast long shadows across the yard. From inside, the sound of his family. All of them alive. All of them within reach.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He could not go back in. Not yet. He stood at the fence until the light left and the shadows dissolved and the streetlamp on the corner hissed to life. Then he went inside and sat in his study and closed the door.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He told Lottie on a Wednesday night. The children were asleep. They sat at the kitchen table, the same table where the panic had gripped him four days earlier. Lottie had a cup of tea. William had nothing in front of him. His hands rested on the wood.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He was quiet for a long time. Lottie waited. She had learned which of his silences were stalling and which were gathering, and this one was gathering.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“My mind goes to rooms,” he said. “Rooms you don’t want to know exist. I go there every night. Sometimes during the day. I went there Sunday at this table, with everyone sitting right here.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Lottie set her tea down.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“The rooms are real places. Glasnevin. Stephen Street. The flat in Boston where Joseph died. The bedroom where Mary told me she was sick. I don’t choose to go there. I’m just there. And every time I come back it takes longer. I used to be able to shake it off and get to work. Lately I can’t shake it at all.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Lottie was still. She watched his face with the particular attention she gave to things she intended to manage.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“How long has this been happening?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Years. Since before we married. Since before Mary Margaret. It used to come and go. Now it comes and stays.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“You never told me.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I couldn’t. I didn’t have the words for it. I’m not sure I have them now.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Lottie picked up her tea again and held it without drinking. She was calculating. He could see it. The same look she wore over the property ledger, sorting columns, looking for where the numbers went wrong.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“We can manage this, William. Together. You can see a doctor. You can talk to Father Keane. You can stop taking so many jobs and rest. We can manage it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Don’t need no priest. I have to manage it in a way that works with me, in a way that feels natural.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“We have managed everything else. We managed the Kansas foreclosure. We managed Mary Margaret’s death. We managed the business through the Panic. You are not the first person to carry grief, William. You carry more than most, I know that, but you are not alone in it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I am alone in it.” He said it quietly. Without self-pity. As fact. “You know my grief, Lottie. You’ve seen it. You’ve held my hand through it. But you don’t know the rooms. Nobody does. Nobody has ever been inside what happens in my head when I close my eyes at night and I’m back in a twelve-foot room in Dublin watching a woman carry her dead child down a staircase. You haven’t been in the room where Joseph stopped breathing and I couldn’t get the window open. You don’t know what it sounds like when Mary told me she felt weak and I already knew what it was before the doctor said a word.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">His hands pressed harder into the table.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I look at Charlotte and I count the years she has left based on how long Teresa lasted. I do that. I look at Alex and I calculate the odds. He is my only Boog son. I am a curse to him. Our baby is asleep upstairs right now and I have already buried him in my mind a hundred times. That is not something you can manage with a doctor or a priest.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">The kitchen was quiet. The clock on the shelf ticked. Somewhere upstairs, a child turned over in bed and the floorboards creaked.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Lottie’s face had gone tight. Not with sympathy. With resistance.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“So what are you telling me, William?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I’ve been reading about southern Oregon. The Rogue Valley. A town called Grants Pass. Timber country, mining, orchards going in along every creek bottom. Twenty-three hundred people. The whole place is building and there’s nobody to paint it. Real estate is a fraction of what it costs here. I need to get away and this spot seems like it was built for me.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Lottie stared at him. The calculation in her face was gone. What replaced it was recognition. She had seen this before. Not the business pitch. The pivot. The moment where William Boog took something that was breaking him apart and dressed it up as opportunity.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“No,” she said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">William stopped.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“No. You do not get to sit at this table and tell me your mind is destroying you and then hand me a real estate prospectus. Those are two different conversations and you are trying to make them the same one.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“They are the same one.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“They are not.” Her voice was firm. Low. “One conversation is about a man who is in pain and needs help. The other conversation is about a man who wants to run away. Again. Across the country. Away from his wife and children. Because the pain is too close and you have never once in your life tried to stand inside it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“That’s not fair.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“It is completely fair. Dublin to Boston. Boston to St. Paul. And now you’re sitting here telling me Oregon. You know what comes after Oregon, William? The Pacific Ocean. And then where do you go?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He had no answer for that.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Lottie stood from the table. She walked to the window. The yard was dark. She stood there with her arms folded, her back to him. When she spoke again her voice had not softened.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I have many children asleep in this house. Charlotte is seven years old. She asked me on Sunday if her father was sick. I told her no. I lied to my daughter. For you.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">She turned.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I left Kansas. I buried Valentin. I raised six children on my own before I ever met you. I married you because I believed you were building something worth being part of. I walked into your grief with both eyes open. I have managed your books and your properties and your moods and your midnight pacing for eight years and I have never once complained because I understood what I was signing up for.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Her hands were at her sides. Straight. The ring on her right hand caught the lamplight.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“But I did not sign up to be left. I did not sign up to raise another set of children alone while their father sits on a porch in Oregon and convinces himself the distance is medicine.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">William looked at the table. He could not look at her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“You think I don’t understand,” he said. “You think this is just grief and I’m being dramatic about it. You think it can be fixed. Lottie, if you knew what happens in my head you would not sit across from me and say we can manage it. You would not say that. Because it cannot be managed. It is in me. It is built into me. Every good thing I have ever touched I have watched die. The watching is in my bones and it will not come out. I could be the reason my kids always die. I can’t carry this.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Then let me help you carry it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“You can’t carry it. That’s what I’m telling you. Not because you’re not strong enough. Because it’s mine. It lives in rooms you’ve never been in, and I would not send you there for anything. You want to manage it. I love that about you. I love that you think a ledger and a list and a paid-up tax bill can hold a life together. Most of the time you’re right. This time you’re not.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Lottie’s jaw tightened and eyes widened. She came back to the table. She sat down. She did not pick up her tea.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I think you are wrong,” she said. “I think you are a man in pain who has never asked for help because you’ve spent your entire life being the one other people lean on. I think Oregon is not a cure. I think Oregon is you climbing another ladder to get above it, and one day you will fall off that one too.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Maybe.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Not maybe. Certainly.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I’m going anyway.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">The words sat between them. Lottie looked at him. He made himself look back. Her eyes were wet. She did not blink. She would not give him the relief of breaking first.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I will keep the books,” she said. Her voice was controlled. Pulled tight like a wire. “The properties, the taxes, the tenants. Charlotte is old enough to start learning the ledger. I will manage what you leave behind because that is what I do. I have always managed what you leave behind.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Lottie.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I am not finished.” She put her palm flat on the table. “You write to me. Every week. Not property descriptions. Not acreage. You tell me how you are. If you lie to me in a letter, William, I will know. I have read enough of your handwriting to know when you are lying.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I won’t lie.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“You’re lying right now. You’re telling yourself this is about business. A new town, new contracts, fresh start. You believe it because you need to. But I am sitting across from you and I can see what this actually is. This is a man who is terrified that if he stays in this house he will lose his mind. And instead of saying that plainly, you hand me Oregon.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">The silence held. William’s throat worked. His eyes were wet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I am terrified,” he said. “Is that what you need to hear? I am terrified that I will lose my mind. I am terrified that one of those children upstairs will get sick and I will be in this house watching it happen again and this time I will not survive it. I have survived it seven times and I do not have an eighth in me. I’ve watched one half of my family get ravaged by death, only to have the rest leave me. With my luck, the other half isn’t far behind.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Lottie closed her eyes. When she opened them the anger was still there. Under it was something else. Not acceptance. Not agreement. Grief of her own, for the life she had imagined and was now watching rearrange itself around a man who could not stay.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I think you are making a mistake,” she said. “I want that on the record. I think you are making the biggest mistake of your life and I think Oregon will not fix what is broken in you and I think you will be alone in a valley a thousand miles from your family. You figure yourself out quickly and come back to your family.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I know,” William said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“And you’re going.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I’m going.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Lottie picked up her tea. Cold. She drank it anyway. She set the cup down and turned it once in its saucer, a slow, deliberate rotation. The gesture of a woman who has said everything she intended to say and knows it was not enough.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Then go,” she said. “And God help you, because I have tried.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">She stood from the table. She took her cup to the basin. She washed it. She dried it. She placed it in the cabinet and closed the cabinet door. Each motion had some anger in it. Each motion  was a wall going up. She walked past him without touching him and went upstairs.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">William sat at the kitchen table alone. The clock ticked. The lamp threw a circle of light across the wood. Upstairs, the creak of the bedroom floor as Lottie got into bed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He stayed at the table. The grain was under his hands. Solid. Cool. He kept his hands there for a long time, as if the table were the one thing in the house that would not move.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">William Boog left for Oregon in the spring of 1900. He was fifty-eight years old.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">Lottie drove him to the station. The morning was cold. She wore her good coat. The brooch that Mary Margaret had given her sat at her collar. William carried one trunk and a toolbox. The children were at school. He had said goodbye to them the night before, quickly, casually, the way a man says goodbye when he is leaving for a job and will be back soon. Charlotte had looked at him and not believed it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">On the platform, the train idling. William set down the trunk. He looked at Lottie. Her face was composed. Her chin was lifted. She had not forgiven him. She had not come around to his way of thinking. She was here because she was his wife and this was what you did, you stood on the platform, you saw the man off, you did not let him leave without your face being the last thing he carried.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I’ll write,” he said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“You’d better.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I’ll buy property in their names. Every one of them.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“I don’t care about property, William.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He ran out of things to say. She stepped forward and straightened his collar, a gesture so automatic she probably didn’t know she was doing it. Her fingers brushed the lapel of his jacket, just above the breast pocket where the paper sat.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">“Take care of yourself,” she said. “You’re no spring chicken.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">He picked up the trunk. He climbed the steps. At the top he turned and looked at her one more time, standing on the platform with her hands clasped in front of her. She was not crying. She would not give him that. She stood straight and still in her good coat with the brooch at her collar and she looked at him without flinching.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c1">The train pulled out. He watched St. Paul slide past the window, the steeples and the elms and the rooflines he had painted, all of it moving, all of it leaving him, and he understood with a clarity that he had the equation backward his whole life. He was not leaving them. He was the one being left behind. He had been left behind since Dublin. The world moved forward and he kept leaping after it and calling it ambition when it was something else entirely.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c4">
      <span class="c7">The prairies opened. William sat with his trunk between his knees. In his breast pocket, the paper.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>