<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c17" id="h.pbbvkv1c4nui">
      <span>Chapter Twenty-Seven</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c46 c31">Scattered like bugs</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Letitia had been the quiet center of the family for so long that William had stopped noticing when she changed. The child who shared her food on the ship from Queenstown. The girl who prayed while her siblings slept through storms. Somewhere in St. Paul she had grown into a woman who could hold a room, tell a story, charm a neighbor into lending garden tools with two sentences and a sideways smile. William still thought of her as the silent one. He was years behind.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A Sunday morning in the late summer of 1891. Letitia was home for the weekend, sitting at the breakfast table in the Dayton Avenue house. She was twenty-two. The children moved around her in their usual noise but she was somewhere else entirely. Her hands were in her lap. Her plate was untouched. Her eyes were fixed on the window where the early light came through in beams and lit the dust that floated in the still air.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William noticed. He noticed her when others did not because she was the easiest to miss.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">After breakfast, she found him alone on the porch.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Pa, I need to tell you something.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He looked at her. She had Mary’s eyes. Not Mary Margaret’s version of them, which carried heat and stubbornness. Letitia’s eyes were her mother’s at their most still.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">That morning before breakfast Letitia had walked the garden. The first frost of autumn had arrived overnight and the basil was finished. She picked what remained and set it on the kitchen counter. She brushed the soil from her knees. She washed her hands at the basin. Then she sat at the table and waited for her father.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She had been tending gardens for thirteen years now. Every house the family occupied, she found a patch of earth and worked it. Herbs for cooking. Flowers for the table. Tomatoes that Mary Margaret distributed to the neighbors. She built it the same way every year. Quietly. Without asking permission.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I’ve been accepted at St. Catherine’s.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William said nothing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I’ve been thinking about this for a long time. Since before we left Boston. Since before Ma died. I don’t know how to explain it except that I’ve always felt called, and I’ve spent years telling myself it was something else.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“A nun.” William’s voice was flat. Not angry. Processing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Sister Berissima. That’s the name I’ve chosen.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“That’s not your name. Your name is Letitia Agnes Boog.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“It will still be my name. It will always be my name. But this is what I’m meant to do. I know it the same way you knew you were supposed to leave Dublin. The same way you knew about the corner shop on Aston’s Quay, and Minnesota, and all of it. You’ve spent your whole life chasing something, Pa. I’ve spent mine wanting to stay still. You’ve never been able to explain that feeling, have you? The pull toward something you can’t see yet?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William looked at his daughter. She had just described his entire life back to him, and she was right, and he hated that she was right because it meant he could not argue with her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Your mother would have understood this,” he said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I think Ma is the reason I understand it.” She paused. “Also, the basil was getting too easy. I needed a harder calling.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Letitia pulled out a deed folded in her purse. She handed it over without ceremony. Carroll Avenue. The house William had given her, now returned. William picked up the deed and studied it. He accepted it and said nothing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A long silence. The Sunday bells were ringing somewhere across the city. They had irritated him for years, those bells. Every toll another knock on a door he had shut. But standing here with his daughter, he listened, and for once the sound did not irritate him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“St. Catherine’s,” he said. “Is it a good place?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“It’s a good place.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He nodded. The nod took a long time. When it was done, he put his hand on Letitia’s head, and held it there.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You were the first name on the manifest, you know. You and Teresa. Passengers one and two on the City of Paris. Four years old and you didn’t cry.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I remember.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“No you don’t.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She smiled. “No. But you’ve told me enough times that I feel like I do.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Letitia returned to the Sisters before the leaves turned. William drove her. They did not speak for most of the ride. At the gate she stepped down with her bag. She hugged him, brief and fierce, and he held on longer than she expected. When she pulled back his eyes were wet. This was not a departure. She had already left years ago. This was the door closing behind her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“None of that, Pa. I’ll write.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You’d better.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She walked through the gate. He watched until the door closed behind her. Then he sat in the carriage for a long time, alone, with the reins slack in his hands. Two of Mary’s children remained in the world he could reach. Mary Margaret and Rose. Letitia had been leaving since the morning he carried her bag to the Sisters on Ramsey Street. He had spent twelve years pretending otherwise.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The first letter arrived in October. Rose brought it to the kitchen table and read it aloud while William stood at the stove pretending not to listen.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Letitia wrote the way she spoke, warm and specific, with a sharpness that surfaced when you least expected it. The vows had changed nothing about her work. She was painting devotional subjects in oil on canvas and on fired china, and she was teaching younger students at Saint Agatha’s Conservatory. She described the studio where she now had her own table: north-facing windows, rags stained with cadmium and cobalt, the smell of linseed oil. “It smells like Pa’s shop,” she wrote, “except holier and with fewer complaints about the foreman.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She had started a small garden outside the convent kitchen. Not much. Herbs mostly. She cut flowers from it and arranged them at the foot of a statue of Our Lady of Victory that stood in the corner of her studio. She painted with the flowers beside her. She wrote that the garden and the painting were not separate things. They were the same work done with different hands.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Rose read the letter twice. The second time silently, her lips moving over the words. She folded it and held it against her chest.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“She sounds happy,” Rose said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William nodded. He did not trust himself to say more.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Rose kept the letter in the drawer of her bedside table. She would read it again in the coming weeks. The part about the studio. The north-facing light. The flowers at the foot of the statue. The sense that Letitia had found a room where her eye for paint and beauty and her faith occupied the same space.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">After Letitia took her vows, William felt the urge to hold his remaining children closer. Rose, his youngest, had him wrapped around her finger. Her words alone could mean nothing and still tug at his heart-strings.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Rose had offered to paint the garden fence and look after the beds. William smiled when she offered.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">By spring of 1892, Lottie was expecting. She carried the pregnancy the way she carried everything: with lists, schedules, and calm certainty. She rearranged the sleeping chart on the pantry door to account for a crib. She told the children at breakfast one morning, matter of fact, and the table erupted. William sat at the end of the table with his coffee and watched the noise pour over him. A child with Lottie. The right side of the paper, filling in. Perhaps another son was due to come his way.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Charlotte Magdalen Boog was born in June of 1892. Rose picked the middle name. William held the baby. He was older now. His hair had gone mostly gray. His hands were more lined, the knuckles thicker. He looked at this child and the fear was there, the old fear, the one that had lived in him since George died in Dublin. It would never leave. He knew that. He also knew that the hope sitting right beside it was stronger than it had any right to be.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">That night, the paper came out again. He unfolded it. On the right half, under CHARLOTTE, he wrote: Charlotte. His wife was so special to him that their first daughter was named after her. Charlotte Magdalen was the first name on the right side to have a child’s weight beneath it. The right half of the paper had begun.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Rose and Mary Margaret grew closer. Rose was the youngest of Mary’s children, and she was becoming someone William had not anticipated. She painted. Not houses. Not casually, not as a pastime, but with the same obsessive focus William had brought to leather and paint. Letitia inspired her. She sat at the kitchen table with scraps of paper and a small brush and sketched faces, buildings, trees, the view from the Dayton Avenue windows. Her lines were clean and confident. She had an eye.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William found her one afternoon painting the front of the house. She had captured the porch columns, the angle of the roof, the shadow patterns on the clapboard, all with a precision that startled him. He looked at the drawing, then at the house, then back at the drawing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Where did you learn that?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I watched you.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I’m a painter, Rose. Not an artist.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You’re both. You just don’t know it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He looked at her. She had Mary’s soft eyes and strong jawline and something else, something that did not come from either parent. A way of seeing the world as a composition. Colors and shadow and line.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Rose, when you were a little girl, do you remember what I asked you often?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She crinkled her nose and shrugged her shoulders.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I asked if I could put you in my pocket, so you’d always be with me. So how bout it, can I just keep you in my pocket?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She looked down, then looked at him with a sideways smile.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Be careful, I could steal your paintbrush while I’m in there.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A silence settled between them. William gave her one pat on the shoulder and walked off. The pocket of warmth inside of him was something he clung onto dearly.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>