<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c54"><span class="c44">Chapter Fifteen</span></h2>
    <p class="c59">
      <span class="c35 c31">The rocking of a chair</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c32 c43">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The room after. Two beds gone. Mary Margaret, Letitia. Two remaining out of seven. The math was the math.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary sat in a chair by the window. She was present but vacant. The singing had stopped entirely. She performed the functions of a mother. Cooking, cleaning, dressing the children. Some essential light behind her eyes had dimmed. She was doing the work of living without being fully inside it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William came home from work. He stood in the doorway and took in the scene. The reduced family. The missing beds. His wife in the chair. He set his paint bucket down.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Go and play outside for a bit,” he said to the children. Gently.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The children left. William approached Mary. He knelt in front of her. She did not look at him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Mary.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Nothing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Mary, look at me.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She did. Mary Boog stood without her armor. Her face was open and raw. She was not crying. She was past crying, past the place where tears come from. She was a mother who had buried five children, and she was looking at her husband for a reason to keep breathing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“How many more?” she whispered.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William had no answer. He put his forehead against her knee and held her. Her hand found the back of his head. They stayed like this in silence while the winter continued to take over the room. Broken but still together.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“You are the best mother any child could ask for.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“How many more?” she barely got the words out.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Don’t you ever give up. Boogs don’t quit.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I don’t need that. I need to heal.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William did what he could. He came home from painting and cooked. Badly. The potatoes were hard in the centers and the broth tasted of nothing, but he put it on the table, served the children and cleaned the dishes after. He swept the floors. He folded the washing, clumsily, the creases all wrong, the shirts inside out. He did it anyway. Mary sat in her chair and watched him work through the domestic rituals that had always been hers. Her face changed. She was seeing him do something he had never done. Not for himself. For her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">One evening she stood up from the chair. William was at the stove, burning something. She walked over and took the spoon from his hand without a word. He stepped back. She stirred the pot and adjusted the heat and added a pinch of salt. She did not look at him. She did not need to. The act itself was the message.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The next morning she dressed the children. The morning after that she went to the market. Slowly, in tiny increments, Mary returned to the surface of what used to be her life. Not the same woman. The singing was still gone.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret tried to match her father’s resolve, though she was only six and her brother Austin had been her whole world. She cried in the mornings. She cried at meals. She cried at night with her face pressed into the mattress so no one would hear, but Letitia always heard. Each time, Letitia would slip across the gap between their sleeping spots and press herself against her sister’s back, one arm draped over her, saying nothing. Just warmth. Just presence.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Spring came. Mary gave birth again. The arrival was quick and unremarkable, or as unremarkable as the arrival of a new life could be in a house already haunted by so much death. A boy. John. Named after the saint. William had his son who could carry on his name.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William looked at the child. He should have felt the complicated joy from before, the dread mixed with hope. This time his face was different. It was protective, and the protection bordered on desperate. He looked at this baby as if he already knew he might lose him. Boston took no prisoners. Maybe his friend in Dublin was right.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Tiredness had settled into Mary and would not leave.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“John,” she said. “After the saint.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William nodded. He did not trust himself to speak.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Three months later. They had been here before. They knew this scene. The baby was sick. The same symptoms. The same terrible sounds that had taken Joseph. Mary looked at the water jug on the table. She looked at the milk. She touched neither. The heat was bad. July in Boston, the air in the tenement was thick and heavy. Flies circled the window and could not be kept out.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary sat in the chair by the window. She held John. She was rocking. Not singing, because she had no songs left. Just rocking. Back and forth, back and forth, the chair’s runners creaked against the floor in a rhythm that sounded like the only prayer she had left.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William stood behind her, his hand on her shoulder. He was looking at the ceiling. His mouth moved. No sound came.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The baby was still.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary continued to rock.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Outside on Prince Street, the water pump dripped. Boston did not care.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c43 c32">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c12">
      <span class="c7 c65 c31">John Boog died in the summer of 1875. He was three months old.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The apartment was dark. The remaining children were asleep. Mary Margaret. Letitia. Two out of nine pregnancies. No sons. That was the math now.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William sat at the table. He took out the paper. He unfolded it along the crease that had become as familiar as a scar.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The left half. MARY at the top. Below her, the names of every child she had given him: George X. Joseph X. Austin X. Mary. Letitia. Teresa X. William X. John.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He picked up the pen. He wrote the X after John. His hand shook. He set the pen down and pressed both palms flat on the table and held them there, fingers spread, until the shaking stopped.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Six X’s. Two names without. Mary Margaret. Letitia.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He folded the paper and put it in his breast pocket. A sigh of disgust escapes him.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>