<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c54">
      <span>Chapter Three</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c46 c31">Bird Shit and Block Letters</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The morning was grey and tasted of rain that had not yet arrived. William stood outside a proper bootmaker's workshop on Upper Stephen Street with his hands in his pockets. He was twelve years old, taller than he was but still lean, lean from growing faster than food could follow. The year was 1853. The famine was officially over. The tenements had not received the news.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The workshop belonged to a man named Doyle. Fifties, thick-armed, with a leather apron so permanently stained and molded to his form that it had become part of his body. Through the workshop window, Doyle worked at his bench, cutting, shaping, pulling thread through sole leather with the steady rhythm of a man who has done this every day for thirty years and expects to do it for thirty more. The smell of leather and oil drifted through the gap beneath the door.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William had been standing there for what appeared to be a long time. Long enough that his feet had gone numb against the cobblestones. Long enough that the bread-woman who passed every morning had passed twice and given him a look both times. Doyle glanced at him through the window. He ignored him and went back to work.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William did not move.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The rain arrived. Not the soft, apologetic drizzle the guidebooks will one day call mist, but proper Dublin rain, diagonal and persistent. William was soaked through in minutes. His shirt darkened. His hair plastered flat. Water ran down his face and dripped from his chin. He did not move.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Doyle came to the door. He filled the frame, barrel-chested, square-jawed, with the look of a man who had been interrupted.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Are you thick in the head, boy?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I want to learn." His voice held steadier than his age should have allowed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Every boy out here wants something. What makes you any different?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William reached into his pocket and pulled out a piece of leather. It was crude but recognisable, an attempt at the top of a shoe. He hand-stitched it with thread he had scavenged from God knows where. The stitching was uneven. The edges were rough. But there was purpose in it. Someone looked at a shoe, understood its construction, and tried to reproduce it with scraps and willpower.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Doyle took it. Turned it over. His thick fingers followed the stitch line, testing the tension, feeling for where the boy got it right and where he didn't. He looked at William, standing in the rain, and something shifted in his expression, a softening around the eyes that he immediately corrected.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Get in here, boy."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William stepped inside. The warmth of the workshop hit him first. He noticed the iron stove in the corner, the air thick with the smell of leather, beeswax, and turpentine. Then the quiet. The purposeful quiet of a place where things are made, a quiet that would turn into racket soon. Doyle held up the piece of leather and looked at William condescendingly.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Did you stitch this together, or did your mother help you?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I'm on my own. Mother has been gone for a while now."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William paused. His eyes dropped to the floor, then lifted to the leather in Doyle's hands. When he spoke again his chin lifted a fraction.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I stitched it together. Found scraps in the trash and laying around. I watched you and others work on shoes and boots. Put my mind to it, and I've slowly learned how to stitch."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Doyle snorted. "Heh, I've seen better stitching in Northampton! Look at it! The stitching looks like bird shit! And how durable is it?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He gripped both sides of the leather and pulled. There was a short struggle, the thread held for a moment, then ripped with a bunch of tiny pops. The pieces came apart in his hands. Doyle set the ruined experiment on the bench.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Someone's toes would be exposed in a month with this."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William said nothing. He watched.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"The English?" Doyle picked up a factory boot from a shelf behind him. The leather was already cracking and a stitch was coming out. "They make shoes like this. Cheap to make, make it fast, the customer comes back quickly to buy again and again. Us Irish?" He set the factory boot down and picked up one of his own, hand-lasted, double-stitched, thick sole, the leather supple and dark with oil. "We make proper footwear. Something you can be proud of. Our name is on it, you know?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William nodded.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Doyle looked at him for a long moment. The rain hammered the window. The stove ticked.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I can see you ain't goin' away. But I am a busy man, not much time to teach. You'll sweep. You'll carry. You'll do whatever I tell you and you won't speak unless spoken to. And I don't pay."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I don't need pay. I need a trade."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Doyle stared at him. Then he stepped aside. William grabbed a broom before the man had finished moving, a grin splitting his face wide open.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The years in Doyle's workshop passed and revealed the rhythms of the craft. William swept. He carried. He did whatever Doyle told him and he did not speak unless spoken to. But he watches. He watched, still and watchful as a hawk on a fencepost. This was second nature to him, patient, absorbing everything.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He watched from the corner of his eye while sweeping, tracking Doyle's hands. He held the boot last while Doyle shaped leather around it, his own hands sweating with concentration, willing them to learn what they are touching. Weeks passed. His hands became more steady and calm. He threaded a needle through sole leather with something approaching confidence.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Doyle inspected a boot that William had made. He turned it over, ran his thumb along the stitching, tested the heel seat with a press of his palm. He frowned. Set it down. Doyle gave nothing easily. But this time he gave the smallest nod, a movement so slight it could be a twitch. William saw it and stood a little straighter.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">By fourteen, William worked alone at the bench. Doyle could finally relax. He sat in the back of the workshop, smoking a pipe, his legs stretched out, watching the boy who was no longer a boy work with steady hands. The pipe smoke curled toward the ceiling. Doyle said nothing, because nothing needed to be said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William finished a pair of boots. He held one up to examine it. Rotated it. Examined the sole from below, the clean line of the stitching, the way the leather wraps  tightly without a single wrinkle. It’s decent work. He knew it. The leather knew it. He allowed himself the faintest smile, a private thing, meant for no one.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Back on Stephen Street, William and the family he was adopted into moved around to a few different buildings. Every move felt like a new beginning but always ended with the same result. William was old enough to question this.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Pa, I was talking with Jon Murphy. He was telling me that he gets to go across the ocean some day. I asked him why. He said it was in his name. He said Murphy meant ‘sea warrior’ and that he was destined to it. I told him I could cross with him. He laughed at me.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">There was silence. William had been thinking about the question he was about to ask for quite a while.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I remember when sister Mary was teasing me, she told me I was adopted. Then you and ma told me that I was. Pa, what name was I born into?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Lucky you’re you, kid, you are born into our last name, in a queer way. You see, we have a lot of relatives in Scotland. Most of them go by Boag now. However, they have changed the spelling of their name often. It’s been Bogue and Boag. My father left Scotland and came here. I don’t know why, he died when I was young. I figured new place, new spelling. Boog. Where was I getting at? Oh, the Scots. William, your father is a distant cousin of mine. He is a weaver in Perthshire. When all of this happened, it was clear he doesn’t want you in his life. He has his own wife and kids. Your mother is from around here, could be dead by now, she didn’t want you either. We agreed to take you in. See, your mother had joined a trip to Scotland to get materials to bring back here. Life got much harder for her after she came back here, pregnant with you.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William was gutted. Neither parent wanted him. His own adopted parents were gone half the time. His sister was out on her own by now. The feeling of neglect and rejection pushed past a place of tears, no tears would find their way out. This gut punch turned into a fury when William noticed the smell around him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Does he…” William wanted to ask more, then he thought to himself “If he doesn’t want me in his life, why do I care about his?” “Nevermind, Pa. Sounds like you can say whatever you want for this, but what does it mean to be a Boog, your name?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Nothing. It means nothing. We are the only Boogs in Dublin, perhaps Ireland. Maybe it will mean ‘famine survivor’. Don’t worry, kid. You have to look forward. Make the most of your situation.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c29">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Eighteen years old. The year was 1859. William stood outside a modest stall, his own corner of Stephen Street, a rented nook barely wider than his shoulders, but his. In his hands, a small hand-painted sign, still wet. The letters were clean and square, painted in the careful block style of a man who had taught himself penmanship the same way he taught himself everything else: by refusing to stop.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">BOOG — BOOTS &amp; SHOES.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He propped up the sign carefully and stepped back.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Then he stepped forward again towards the sign. His fingertips touched the letters. The B was the bookend, nice and powerful. The two middle O's, they were almost like eyes staring back at him. The G, that curve and kick, a fine bookend as well. His name. On something permanent. Not scratched into dirt, not something scribbled in a church registry, not just a funny last name. This was a new name, a name painted in clean block letters on a sign. This name was now on a street where people will walk past and read it. But it’s a name with no meaning.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">For William, it was the first time the name BOOG had existed on anything fixed in the physical world. There was no father's sign to echo. No family shopfront to inherit. No grandfather's trade card in a drawer. This was the first. William stood there a moment longer than the task required. “Hrmm”. He grunted a grunt of approval. The restlessness he had carried since birth went quiet. Born in a room divided by blankets, a name attached to nothing. Now his name was on a thing that would not blow away.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He dropped his hand and adjusted the sign a fraction of an inch. Then he went inside and began arranging his bench.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Across the street, Doyle stood with his arms folded, watching. His face carried no expression that could be called pride. Doyle did not do pride, not in a way that showed. He stayed there longer than the task of watching required. Then he uncrossed his arms, turned back to his own shop, and closed the door quietly behind him.</span>
  </body>
</html>