<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c54"><span class="c44">Chapter Eleven</span></h2>
    <p class="c59">
      <span class="c35 c31">Slums again, but with an American accent</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c43 c32">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c12">
      <span class="c1">Boston, Massachusetts. 1873.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Prince Street sat four blocks west of the harbor in Boston’s North End, close enough that the salt air reached the tenement windows on mornings when the wind came off the water. The street was narrow, brick-walled on both sides, and dense with Irish families who had arrived in waves since the Famine years. By 1873 the neighborhood had its own parishes, its own mutual-aid societies, its own ward bosses who could deliver votes and favors in the same handshake. The Irish had built themselves a village inside a city. They had also built themselves a cage.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William walked Prince Street for the first time carrying nothing but the trunk and whatever remained of the money from Queenstown. Mary walked beside him, looking skeptical. The older children trailed behind. Austin had Teresa by the hand. Mary Margaret walked alone. Letitia stayed close to her mother.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The cold hit first. Dublin had rain and damp, a gray chill that settled in the lining of a coat. Boston’s cold was something else. It came off the harbor and struck the face with blunt authority. The children had never felt wind with their actual teeth. Letitia pulled her collar up and kept walking. Teresa grabbed at the air as if she could catch it between her fingers.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">South of here, the Great Fire had burned through whole blocks the previous November, and now the noise of reconstruction carried into the streets. Prince Street itself had not burned. What lived here was older damage. Tenements three and four stories high with barely eight feet of sky between them. Wooden staircases bolted to the backs of buildings. Clotheslines strung between windows thick with sheets. An Italian grocer had set up on the corner of Prince and Salem, his hand-painted sign in a language none of the Irish could read. The smell of garlic drifted into the evening cabbage air. The neighborhood was changing. Not yet. Soon.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary saw it all. Her face fell, just slightly. She recovered fast, because she always did, but William caught it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“It’s temporary,” he said, low, just for her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“That’s good, temporary is all you know anyways.” she said without looking at him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">That landed. William did not respond. They kept walking.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">On their first Sunday in Boston they walked to St. Stephen’s on Hanover Street. The church sat between two tenement buildings. A bell rang from the steeple and the sound carried down Prince Street and into the alleys where the Irish were pulling on their best clothes and herding children toward the door.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary had pressed the children’s shirts with a flat iron borrowed from the woman next door. She had combed their hair with water and a wooden comb that was missing three teeth. She had scrubbed their faces until they shone. William wore his one good coat and a collar that Mary had starched stiff enough to hold a shape. He looked uncomfortable in it. He pulled at it twice on the walk over.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The church was full. Standing room along the back wall. The pews held Irish families packed tight. Men with hands folded in their laps. Women in shawls that had crossed the Atlantic. Children wedged between adults and told to be still. The priest was Irish himself, County Mayo by the sound of his vowels, and he spoke in English with occasional phrases of Latin that the older women mouthed along with him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary knelt and performed the sign of the cross. She closed her eyes. Her lips moved. The children followed. All except William. He sat when others knelt. He was last to stand when others stood. He went through the sequence a bit slower than everyone else. He was here for Mary. She knew it. He knew she knew it. The arrangement had been in place since Dublin.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">After mass the families spilled outside to the footpath. The Irish network operated here the same as it had in Dublin. You arrived, you were absorbed, you were given directions to the nearest grocer and the name of a man who might have work. An older Irish woman gripped Mary’s hand and asked where they were from and how many children and where they were living. Two men in paint-spattered coats shook William’s hand and asked what trade. A boy Austin’s age appeared. He and Austin just looked at each other briefly, said nothing, and ran off together toward the end of the block.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William watched the crowd thin. He noticed the men. The ones with trades moved differently from the ones without. A man with a skill had a certain set to his shoulders. A man looking for day labor kept his eyes lower. William had been reading bodies since Dublin.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary noticed the women. Some held their children close while others held their children loosely. Mary knew some of these women are overly joyful and some have gone through hell. She could read the losses in a woman’s face. A skill picked up from the Famine in Dublin.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The Boog family walked home through the narrow streets. Children filled the gutters and chased each other between the carts. One boy stood on an overturned crate and pretended to be a preacher. His congregation was a stray dog and two smaller boys who pelted him with chestnuts. The dog took a chestnut in the mouth and trotted away looking satisfied.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Letitia watched the boy on the crate. She tugged at Mary’s hand and pointed. Mary looked. She did not smile but something behind her eyes softened for half a second. The children of Boston survived the same as the children of Dublin. Noise and motion and the refusal to acknowledge that anything was wrong.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The tenement on Prince Street had two rooms this time, a luxury by their standards. The building was brick, which felt sturdy after Dublin’s crumbling plaster. The hallway stank of cabbage and chamber pots, and the walls were thin enough to hear every argument, every prayer, every sneeze, every cough.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary set up the space with practiced efficiency. She had done this before. First in Michael’s Lane, Aston Quay, the ship, and now this. Each time she built a home out of nothing. Blankets arranged just so. The children’s sleeping spots were designated. A corner for cooking. Her hands did not pause. There was no surveying the room, no standing in the doorway deciding where things should go. She already knew.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William stood at the window. Outside, Prince Street pulsed with life. He watched a house painter across the street, up on a ladder, rolling whitewash onto a building facade. William studied the man’s technique. How he loaded the brush. The economy of his strokes.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">His bootmaker’s hands flexed at his sides. Learning. Always learning.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c7 c31">Mary</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary left the children sleeping before dawn. She had been awake for an hour already, listening to the building breathe, hearing the rats negotiate the walls, while the window panes shutter from the wind, thinking of the similarities of her homeland.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She took a basket and went out alone. Prince Street was mostly empty at this hour. A lamplighter was finishing his rounds on the opposite side. His pole tapped each lamp and the gas flames went dark one by one. The sky was still black but the horizon held a thin line of gray above the rooftops.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She walked toward the public pump on the corner of Salem Street. Two other women were already there. They nodded at Mary. She nodded back. The pump handle was stiff from the cold. Mary worked it with both hands until the water came. It was cloudy. She looked at it. Filled her jug anyway.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She continued up the block toward the small market that opened early for the women who came before their husbands woke. The vendor was an old Irishman from Cork who sold potatoes and turnips and whatever else he could source from the farms outside the city. His prices were fair. His produce was not always fresh. He did not pretend otherwise.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Morning, missus.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Morning. Have you any oats today?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I do. They came in yesterday from a farm in Concord. Still good.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary picked through the oats with her fingers. She pressed a few between her thumb and forefinger. Dry. Clean. No mold. She bought a measure. She bought two potatoes and an onion. She counted her coins in her palm before paying. William had left her a small amount for the week. She could stretch it. She had been stretching money since before she could read.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">On the walk back she passed St. Stephen’s. The doors were open though mass had not begun. A candle burned in the vestibule. Mary stopped. She stood in the doorway for a long moment. The church was empty. The altar was plain. The air smelled of incense and cold stone. She did not go inside. She stood at the threshold with her basket on her arm and looked at the crucifix above the altar from forty feet away.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She had not prayed in a while. Not properly. She had gone through the motions at mass. She had folded her hands and bowed her head because that was what a Catholic mother did. The words had stopped reaching whatever they were meant to reach. The line between her and God had gone slack. She could feel it hanging there. She did not know how to tighten it and she was not certain she wanted to.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I am still here,” she said to the empty church. A prayer. A statement of fact. She said it aloud because she needed to hear her own voice in a space larger than the two rooms on Prince Street. The change was a lot for her, and she did not know if she was pleading or taunting. She paused and only heard her echo back. The guilt reaches her instantly. She performs the sign of the cross, puts her hands together, and genuflects. When finished a peace settles over her. She smiles softly.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary turned and walked home. The street was filled with early morning workers. A man pushed a cart loaded with ice blocks toward the fish market. Two boys carried buckets of coal between them. A woman swept her front step with a broom that was missing half its bristles.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary walked through all of it. Straight and forward with her shoulders square. She was not lost. She knew exactly where she was. She was in Boston. Her children were upstairs in a tenement that smelled of cabbage. Her husband was sleeping on a floor he would leave before the sun was fully up. Her dead sons were in the ground in a city across the ocean.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She climbed the stairs. The building was waking up around her. She set the basket down and began to cook. The oats went into the pot. Water from the jug. A pinch of salt. She stirred.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Letitia was the first to wake. She came to the kitchen corner without being called. She did not speak. She picked up the small broom that Mary kept behind the door and began sweeping the area around the stove. The broom was too tall for her. She gripped it halfway up the handle and worked it with short deliberate strokes. The strokes didn’t lead anywhere, it was just cute. Letitia was just imitating what she had seen before.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“You were up early, Ma.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I was.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I peeked out the window. You walked toward the church. Did you go to the church?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary paused her stirring. “Yes, dear. I didn’t stay, I stood at the door.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Letitia swept in silence for a moment. Then she said something that Mary would carry for years.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Seems like a good door to stand in.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary looked at her daughter. Five years old. Standing in a Boston tenement with a broom she could barely manage. Saying profound things. The blurb and splat sounds emitted behind her. She turned back to the pot. The oats were thickening. She stirred them and did not speak.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Letitia went back to sweeping. The broom scraped the floorboards in short, choppy passes. She made a few small piles of dust and debris before she moved on. From the other room came the sound of the younger children shifting in their blankets, these were the signals of bodies waking in a cramped space.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William came through pulling on his shirt. He looked at the piles that Letitia had made. Then he looked at Mary and was distracted by the smell coming from the pot.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Mmmm, it smells good,” he said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Sit down,” Mary said. “It will be ready soon.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He sat. Mary ladled oats into a bowl and set it in front of him. She did not sit down herself. She stood with her back to the stove and watched the window where the first gray light was beginning to separate the rooftops from the sky. The church bell at St. Stephen’s rang a few times in succession. The final low note hung in the cold air and faded. Mary’s hand rested on the edge of the pot. She was listening to the space after the bell had rang.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A Saturday, weeks later. The children were with Austin in the room. Mary told William she was going to the market. She did go to the market. She bought oats and a turnip and a small piece of salt pork wrapped in paper that was already going translucent with grease. Then she kept walking.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">After going south through the narrow streets, past the tenements, and storefronts with their hand-lettered signs, she noticed that the buildings thinned and the harbor opened up in front of her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She had not been to the water since they arrived. The harbor was loud with commerce. Ships at the wharves, men hauling rope, carts loaded with barrels and crates. The smell was fish and salt accompanied by the stink of low tide. Nothing like the Liffey. Bigger. Rougher. The wind came off the open water and carried a cold she could feel in her bones.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She walked to the end of a wharf. The planks were slick with brine and she set her feet carefully. She stood at the edge with her basket on her arm and looked east across the harbor, past the islands, toward the open Atlantic.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The ocean she had spent nine days crossing was out there. Ireland was on the other side of it. George and William Junior were on the other side of it. Her family were on the other side of it. Every door she had ever walked through before this year was on the other side of it, and she was standing here in Boston with salt pork in a basket and no one beside her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She stood there long enough for the cold to soak through her shawl. A fisherman mending a net on the next wharf looked up at her and looked away. She was another Irish woman at the waterfront. There were hundreds of them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">On the walk back she passed a cart selling apples. A farm cart, the man up from the country with a load of Baldwins, small and red and hard. Mary stopped. She looked at the apples. She counted the coins in her palm. She bought one. Not for the children. Not to cook with. She bought it and she ate it standing on the corner of Prince and Salem, the juice running cold over her fingers, the apple so tart her eyes watered. She ate it down to the core and threw the core in the gutter and wiped her hand on her skirt.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She picked up her basket and walked home. Her fingers smelled of apple for the rest of the day.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>