<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c17">
      <span>Chapter Twenty-Five</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c29">
      <span class="c46 c65 c31">A swarm of bees</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c29 c32">
      <span class="c46 c65 c31"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">The morning they went to Como Park, William was up before the sun. Late summer in Minnesota. The air was already thick, the kind of humidity that stuck your shirt to your back before you finished your coffee. He stood at the kitchen window watching the light come in over the rooftops. He had built things. None of it made him as nervous as today.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">He had a phrase he’d carried since Dublin: </span>
      <span class="c7 c31">If you’re early, you’re on time, and if you’re on time, you’re late.</span>
      <span class="c7">He had a phrase he’d carried since Dublin: If you’re early, you’re on time, and if you’re on time, you’re late. He wanted to be the first one there. He wanted to stand in the park with his children and have everything arranged before Lottie arrived. He wanted control over something, because he did not have control over much else.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">The girls moved through the house in a contained frenzy. Clothes pulled from drawers, shoes laced wrong, arguments over who would sit where in the carriage. William loaded everything himself. The whole family in one wagon was a burden on the horse and an exercise in load management. He took pride in this: all three of his children, fed and dressed and together, rolling down the avenue behind a horse that loved to work for them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">He turned onto Lexington and the park was close. A few blocks out, he saw them. Lottie’s caravan coming from the opposite direction, her family packed into their own rig, the children’s heads popping above the sideboards like gophers from their holes.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">William’s hands tightened on the reins. He leaned forward, clicked his tongue, and worked the horse until it had an ever-so-slight lead. He tipped his hat as they passed. Behind him and behind Lottie, children from both carriages craned their necks, twisting to get a look at one another. The introductions had begun without a word spoken.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11">
      <span class="c20 c65"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c7">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11">
      <span class="c20 c65"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">With both horses hitched, the two families stood facing each other in the grass. William and his four on one side. Lottie and her six on the other. Nine children stood in the grass with no script for what came next.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">They walked together toward a spot near the beach. The children were drawn to the water all at once. Lottie began setting up the picnic while the kids took turns running through the shallows and disappearing into the treeline, their voices carrying back in bright, scattered pieces.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Kids, let’s eat.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">William’s voice carried the authority of a man who had run job sites and raised children alone. Lottie’s kids fell in line alongside his own without hesitation. They settled onto a patchwork of blankets. Food was passed around. Rose started eating before everyone had been served.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Letitia saw this. She reached across, took her wrist firmly, and held it there. Her eyes locked without blinking. She pulled her hand down, slow and deliberate. Letitia did not blink.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“What?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Let’s wait until everyone has their food and say the blessing.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Rose sneered at her. She stuck her tongue out. This was a weapon that worked reliably on Mary Margaret. Letitia wouldn’t grant her the same satisfaction, even though she did furrow her eyebrows at her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Lottie noticed. “Go ahead, Letitia. You can say the blessing.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Heavenly Father, please bless this food as it goes into our bodies. We thank you for the farmers and grocers that made this food available to us. We pray for those less fortunate than us...”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">She continued. She blessed every person by name. She prayed for the needy. She covered world peace. Rose shifted in her seat. She kept going.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Amen! Let’s eat,” Rose announced. Letitia was not finished. She bit into her fruit anyway, holding eye contact with her in a standoff neither was willing to lose.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Before the prayer could enter its second act, Anetta leaned toward Letitia and said, “Thank you for a lovely prayer.” And with that, the spell broke. They all dove in.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Lottie leaned toward William while the children ate. “She’s not what I expected.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Who?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Letitia. You described her as the quiet one. She just held ten children hostage with a prayer and a stare.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William looked across the blanket at his daughter, who was laughing at something Joseph Travers had said, her head tilted back, her shoulders loose. He could not remember the last time he had seen her laugh like that.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11">
      <span class="c20 c65"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c7">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11">
      <span class="c20 c65"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">The questions came slowly at first. Careful, calculated, each one testing the ground before the next. They were very different, these children. One family had crossed an ocean. The other had not. One stood beside a strong, distracted father who worked too much. The other had grown up in the steady warmth of a gentle, sophisticated mother. Every child at that table had lost a parent. Nobody said it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Lottie’s boys finished eating first. William Travers led. He always led. He wiped his hands on his trousers and stood.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Everybody follow me. I saw something dead in the woods.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">They followed him into the underbrush, slapping mosquitoes as they went. The bugs were relentless near the lake. William Travers poked at logs and overturned rocks with the confidence of a boy who had never considered consequences.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Mary Margaret spotted it first. A dead tree, still standing, its trunk straight and narrow and tapered to a point like an enormous pencil. Mushrooms climbed its bark in shelves. Ants marched up and down its surface.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Over here. Look at the pencil tree.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">They gathered around it. The tree was buzzing with insects, lined with mushrooms, crawling with hidden life, a strange irony, all that life around something dead.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“I wonder how many bugs are on the inside,” William Travers said. He studied the tree for approximately two seconds. Then, because he was a boy and because the need to demonstrate strength was hardwired into his blood, he attacked the trunk with his bare hands.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">What followed was a sequence of events that unfolded in rapid, irreversible order: a crack, a shift, a low hum that became a roar, and then the air was alive.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“BEES! RUN FOR YOUR LIFE!”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">The moment the words left his mouth, William Travers knew he had made a terrible miscalculation. He pivoted.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Follow me! Bees can’t swim. Everyone, in the lake! Now!”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">From the picnic blankets, Lottie watched the stampede. Her children. His children. All of them sprinting toward the water with their arms windmilling and their screams weaving together into a symphony of terror.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Oh, my children!” She removed her hat slowly, as though considering whether to enter the fray. “Oh dear. William, do something. William!”</span>
      <span class="c7 c31">William!</span>
      <span class="c7">”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">It was too late. William had chosen this particular moment to come apart.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He bent over. Face red. Gasping. He looked toward the children thrashing in the shallows and tried to speak. “Sorry. I can’t.” Another wave took him. He could not even finish the sentence. He could not stop laughing long enough to say he could not stop laughing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Watch out kids, I heard that bees can do the backstroke!”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He continued to laugh even harder, hand on his chest. Face was a little red, a tear streak from the good laugh.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Lottie was not impressed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">In the lake, Mary Margaret took charge. She calmed the younger ones, counted heads, and kept order in the chest-deep water. No one was stung except William Travers, who caught a single sting on the back of his neck during the retreat, a wound he would wear as a badge for weeks.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">As they walked out of the lake, a couple nearby brought towels.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Would you like to use our towels to dry off?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Thank you kindly. Mr. and Mrs.…”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Fitzgerald. Edward and Mollie.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Nice to meet you. We ran from a swarm of bees. These towels are great. Thanks again for them.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">William collected himself and talked with the kids and the Fitzgeralds while the chaos wound down.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11">
      <span class="c20 c65"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c7">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11">
      <span class="c20 c65"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Mary Margaret noticed Lottie starting to clean up. She went to help. They worked side by side for a while, folding blankets, stacking dishes, not saying much. Then they both caught themselves looking at the same thing, William. He stood at the edge of the group, arms crossed, rocking on his toes. The children orbited around him, all ten of them interacting now, their voices tangled together, and he watched them with the quiet, satisfied stillness of a man who has built something and is stepping back to see if it holds.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“He’s always quiet when it matters,” Mary Margaret said. “And he’s always loud when it doesn’t.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">She stopped. She had not intended to say that much to a stranger. But something about Lottie, and this afternoon, and the strange new constellation these two families were forming, had loosened a bolt she normally kept tight.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Do you love him?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">The question stuck. Lottie had not been prepared for it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“First things first. I can tell you that I am very fond of him.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“That’s not what I asked.” Mary Margaret’s voice was steady. She was twenty-two years old and she had her mother’s eyes and her mother’s directness and she was not going to let this slide. “It takes a lot to love a guy like him. But if you do, it’s a world you never see coming. One you can’t describe. And one you’d never want to leave. If you don’t love him yet, I understand.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Lottie held Mary Margaret’s gaze. She did not flinch and she did not rush.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“I’m not saying yes, and I’m not saying no. Here is what I will say, Mary. I cannot replace your mother. I cannot be your mother. And I can tell, from what William has told me and from what I see in you, that she was amazing in every sense of the word.” She paused. Her voice softened but did not weaken. “What I can be is me. Lottie. A woman who wholly admires William and puts her family before herself. That includes her children. Even ones she didn’t give birth to.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">The words settled over Mary Margaret like a hand was on her shoulder. Her walls came down. She had built them from the same material as her father’s: grief, loyalty, the fear of forgetting. “I needed that.” She stepped forward and put her arms around Lottie. The hug lasted a long time. The last woman Mary Margaret had embraced like this was her mother.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11">
      <span class="c20 c65"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c7">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11">
      <span class="c20 c65"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">William gathered everyone together. They were buzzing, with bee stings and lake water and the electric, half-disbelieving energy of children who sense that something in their lives is about to change.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Do you think we should all get together again?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">A loud, unanimous YES erupted from the group.</span>
      <span class="c7 c31">YES</span>
      <span class="c7"> erupted from the group. </span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Alright. I think we can arrange that. For now, I’d rather not ride home in the dark.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">William Travers did not miss a beat. “Last one home is a rotten egg!”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Everyone scrambled. Children piled into carriages. Blankets were thrown. Items shuffled. William, because he was William, made sure he was on the road first. He drove ahead and then waited in the distance, watching over his shoulder until Lottie’s carriage began to move. Only then did he push forward.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Lottie, climbing into her seat, noticed something glinting on the ground. A small piece of jewelry, ruby-colored, catching the late sun. She picked it up and placed it on the back bench beside the other belongings. She would ask about it later.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The two carriages rolled north through the fading afternoon, one ahead and one behind, ten children and two adults who had arrived as strangers and were leaving as something else. The sun was low. The road was long and very bumpy. The small piece of jewelry worked toward the edge of the back bench with each gallop. Lottie did not notice.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">After the picnic, William arranged a solo carriage ride between himself and Lottie. A covered carriage this time, not his work wagon. He brought a blanket for Lottie. He told the driver to follow the bluffs by the river.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">They sat side by side. The Mississippi River curved like a snake between the bluffs. The occasional bird flew by. William was quiet for a long time. Lottie waited. She had already learned that his silences preceded his most important words.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Charlotte, I want to talk with you about something.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She looked at him. He had never called her Charlotte before.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Is everything all right?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Yes, it is. And in truth that is what keeps me up at night. Everything is more than well. I was brought into this world with nothing. Now I am sitting in a carriage in the United States with a lovely woman who my children adore. I have money, a successful business and respect.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He stopped. His hands moved in front of him, searching the air, trying to shape what he meant.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“But this… all came at a cost. Charlotte, I have buried seven kids and a wife.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She put her arm around him. This broad, mustachioed, impossible man who had crossed an ocean and built a life from dust. She put her arm around his shoulders and pressed her hand against his back. She did not speak. She held him until he was ready.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I’m so, so sorry to hear that.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Things ought not to be well, but they are. Better than I deserve.” He leaned forward and called to the driver. “Please stop here. Lottie, step down with me.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">They climbed down and sat together on a bluff just off the path. The river moved below them. The tree leaves along the bank were turning gold.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“How do you take care of those six kids by yourself?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You always get to see the best version of me. But it’s my turn to be honest with you. I struggle. The older ones help out, but not having a man is burdensome.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I see.” William turned a thought over carefully before he spoke it. “Would you be willing to put up with a man? Let’s say a man with skeletons in his closet?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Only if it was you.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William put his arm around her. Behind her back, he caught the carriage driver’s eye and gave a thumbs up. The driver nodded and cleared his throat.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Excuse me, miss? Miss Lottie? I believe you dropped something over here.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Lottie pulled away from William, irritated at the interruption. “One moment!”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You may want to look at this. It looks of importance. What is this? Please come here for a moment.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Lottie sighed and stood, straightening her dress, her face flushed from the moment that had just been broken. She started toward the driver with purpose in her step. Behind her, William turned.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Charlotte.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">His voice came out deep and certain, the voice he reserved for the moments that mattered most. She stopped. Turned around. He was on one knee in the grass beside the bluff, the river below him, the October sky wide and orange behind him, and his face held everything at once. The boy from the tenements. The man who buried his children. The painter who hung his name above a hundred doors. All of it, compressed into a single gesture on a hillside in Minnesota.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He held out his hands.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Charlotte, will you take my hand in marriage?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Yes. Yes, I will.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She floated back to him in three steps and took both his hands in hers and pulled him to his feet. He was not graceful about it. His knees had climbed too many ladders. She held his hands and steadied him there on the bluff above the Mississippi.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>