<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c13{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:6pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c10{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;text-indent:36pt;widows:2}.c12{color:#000000;font-family:"Garamond";font-size:16pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c28{height:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c35{height:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:10pt;padding-top:0pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c41{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:center;widows:2}.c39{line-height:1.5;orphans:2;padding-bottom:12pt;padding-top:12pt;text-align:left;widows:2}.c20{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:10pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c23{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:17pt;font-style:normal;font-weight:400}.c57{font-family:"Garamond";font-size:18pt;font-weight:400}.c50{font-style:normal}.subtitle{color:#666666;font-family:"Arial";font-size:15pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;padding-bottom:16pt;padding-top:0pt;page-break-after:avoid;text-align:left;widows:2}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c54">
      <span>Chapter Six</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c46 c31">The Smallest Mark</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The room above the shop was sparse but clean, Mary’s influence. A candle burned on the small table by the window, its flame steady in the still air. In a wooden cradle, a baby slept. George. Their firstborn. His face was red and wrinkled, his fists clenched even in sleep, as though he arrived in the world braced for argument.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William sat beside the cradle, doing something he had not done before. He was still. His hand rested on the cradle’s edge, rocking it gently with a motion so slight the cradle barely moves. His face showed something unguarded. Barely visible. Gone if you blinked.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary watched from the bed. William Boog, not moving, not planning, not calculating foot traffic or measuring shopfronts. Just sitting beside a cradle in candlelight, rocking his son, and the restlessness that drove him had gone quiet, and what was left was a man in a room with his child.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">After a long moment, William rose. He moved to the table by the window and sat. From a drawer, he took out a single piece of paper. Clean, unlined, good enough for a letter. He had spent money on this.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He folded it once down the middle, pressing the crease sharp with his thumbnail. He took his time with the crease, then admired the blank paper for a brief moment. Then he opened it flat.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">On the left half, at the top, he wrote in careful letters: MARY.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Below her name, he wrote: George.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He looked at what he had written. Two names. His whole world on one side of a folded piece of paper. The ink was dark and clean on the pale surface. The letters were steady. Not the letters of a man with uncertain hands, but of a man who understands that what he was writing mattered more than any sign or invoice or advertisement he will ever compose.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He folded the paper along the crease. Tucked it into his breast pocket. Returned to the cradle. This was a new job for him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary watched from the bed. She did not ask what he had written. She did not need to.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c41">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">George grew. A week became a month, a month became several. The red wrinkled face smoothed and filled. His eyes settled into a steady dark brown, and they tracked William across the room whenever William came up the stairs from the shop. George was exploratory. His fingers found things. Mary’s collar. The edge of the cradle. William’s thumb, which George gripped with a weakness that reminded him that Dublin didn’t give out any favors..</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William came upstairs one evening and found George on his stomach on the floor, chin up, arms pushing against the boards. Mary sat nearby, mending.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“He’s been doing that all afternoon. Lifting himself up and looking about.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William knelt. George’s eyes got a bit wider. His arms shook. He looked at his father and his mouth opened into a wet, toothless shape that was not quite a smile and not quite a word. A sound came out, a single note, high and sharp, aimed at William as if he were supposed to understand it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“He’s talking to you,” Mary said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Maybe he is asking if he’s old enough to help me in the shop.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“He will, one day.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">By autumn, George pulled himself up on the leg of a chair. His fingers whitened on the wood. His legs trembled beneath him and his whole body swayed, but he held. William watched from the doorway with his leather apron still on and said nothing. George looked back at him, standing, unsteady, triumphant for three full seconds before his legs gave and he sat down hard. He did not cry. He reached for the chair leg again.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William came downstairs. Mary was wiping the counter.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“He stood up.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I know. He’s been trying it all week.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You didn’t tell me.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I wanted you to see it yourself.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Winter came. George crawled fast across the floor, fast enough to reach the stairs before Mary could catch him. William built a gate from scrap wood, two short boards nailed across the top of the stairwell. George rattled it with both hands and howled at the obstruction. He had opinions. His voice carried through the floorboards and into the shop below, and customers looked up at the ceiling and smiled, and William pretended not to notice.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">In the evenings, William rocked the boy. Not in the cradle anymore. George was getting too big for the cradle. William held him in his arms in the chair by the window and rocked with his boot heel on the floor, a slow rhythm, heel down, heel up, and George’s eyes would droop and close, and his breathing would shallow, and his body would soften against William’s chest. William rocked long after the boy was asleep. Mary watched and said nothing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c41">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">In March George was developing new abilities and new sicknesses. He had developed a cough. A small sound, dry, nothing to mark it. George fussed and coughed and Mary held him and it passed. Every child in Dublin seemed to have had a cough that winter. The damp came up through the floors and the wind off the Liffey carried whatever the river carried, and children coughed, and the coughing stopped, and nobody gave it further thought.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">George’s cough did not stop. Within a week it deepened, from wet, to raspy, to dry, then back the other way.  The dry bark became something thicker, wetter, a sound that started in his belly and worked its way up through his chest. He coughed in fits, three, four coughs in a row, each one pulling him forward so his small body curled around itself. Then silence. Then the breath in.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The breath in was the sound. Exaggerated. A high, thin whistle on the inhale that came from the narrowest part of his throat. It did not sound like breathing. It sounded like air forced through a space too small to admit it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary held him through the fits. She sat on the floor with her back against the wall and George against her chest, and when the coughing started she pressed him close and braced. His body convulsed with each cough, his face reddening, his eyes wide and wet and terrified. The inhale between fits was the worst. The silence before it lasted one second, sometimes two, and in that silence the room held its breath with him. Then the breath. Then the coughing again.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William heard it through the floor. He was at his bench. A customer was talking. The sound came through the boards, muffled, rhythmic, the cough and then the silence and then the high thin whistle of the inhale. William’s hands stopped. The customer kept talking. William stared at the ceiling.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Apologies. My son is unwell.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He closed the shop early. He went upstairs. George was in Mary’s arms, limp between fits, his face blotched red and white. The fits started again and the boy’s body seized, every muscle contracting at once, his back arching, his mouth open, a rope of saliva hanging from his lip. The sound filled the room. William stood in the doorway and could not move.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“He needs a doctor,” Mary said. Her voice was level. Her arms were shaking.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William went for the dispensary doctor. The man came in the afternoon, climbed the stairs without hurrying, listened to George’s chest through a wooden tube, and stood back.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Whooping cough. The pertussis. Keep him upright during the fits. Steam from boiled water can help the breathing. Feed him what he’ll take. There’s nothing else to be done.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“How long?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Weeks. Sometimes longer. The fever will tell you which way it’s going.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The doctor left. His footsteps on the stairs were steady, unhurried. He had other houses to visit. Other coughs to listen to.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c41">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The days that followed had a terrible sameness. George coughed. The struggling inhale. He vomited from the force of the coughing. Mary cleaned it and held him, waiting for the next fit. The fits came in waves, sometimes minutes apart, sometimes an hour. The silence between them was not silence. It was a held breath, a room suspended, waiting for the sound to return. It always returned.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William boiled water on the stove and held George near the steam. The boy’s breathing eased for a moment, the wheeze softening, his eyes half closing. Then the cough came back and the easing was gone. William tried again. Boiled more water. Held him closer to the pot. Mary pulled him back.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Not so close. You’ll burn him.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“He breathes easier near the steam.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Not so close.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Night was the worst. The coughing came faster in the dark. George’s small body worked through fits that left him gasping, spent, unable to cry. The whoop on the inhale grew louder. It carried through the walls of number seven and into the shop below and out into the street. A neighbor knocked once to ask if the child was all right. Mary answered the door with George on her shoulder, his face pressed against her neck, his breathing rapid and shallow. She said “I don’t know.” She closed the door.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">George’s face changed. The redness became a darker shade, a bruised colour around his mouth and eyes that did not go away between fits. His lips turned the colour of a mussel shell. He stopped reaching for things. His hands lay open at his sides, palms up, fingers curled slightly, and he stared at the ceiling with the flat, exhausted gaze of someone much older. William and Mary both loved the feel of his warmth during snuggles, but George’s warmth now was becoming a warning sign.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">On the ninth night, the fits slowed. Not because George was getting better. Because his body was running out of the strength to cough. The inhale grew thinner, higher, a sound that barely had enough air behind it to make itself heard. Mary held him against her chest and could feel his ribs working, each breath a separate effort, a deliberate mechanical act that a body this small should not have to think about.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William knelt beside them on the floor. He put his hand on George’s back. George was shirtless at this time. His ribs exposed. His breathing irregular. Another fit, but this time almost a minute had passed before he got a breath.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Mary.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I know.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She was rocking. Not for George. George was past being soothed by rocking. She rocked because her body had been doing it for days and did not know how to stop.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The last sound George made was a breath in, with his eyes closed. One final high, thin inhale, the sound of air being pulled through a passage almost fully closed. A weak whistle. Then nothing. The silence that followed was different from the silences between fits. Those silences held the promise of the next breath. This one held nothing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary’s rocking stopped.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William felt the ribs go still under his hand. He did not move his hand. He left it there, on his son’s back, on the small cage of bone that had worked so hard for so many days and now had stopped.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The Liffey flowed outside. A cart passed. A voice called to another voice, and the second voice laughed, and the laughter faded down the quay.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c41">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A dispensary doctor came the next morning. He climbed the stairs without rushing and stood in the doorway for barely a minute. He looked at the cradle. He did not touch the child. He had seen this hundreds of times in this parish alone, and his face carried the flat expression of a man for whom infant death held no power to surprise.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“How old?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Eleven months,” William said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The doctor nodded. He wrote down William Boog, 11 months. He recommended to William and Mary that George be buried at Glasnevin, that is where the poor buried their young. He turned and left, and his footsteps faded on the stairs without slowing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William carried the boy down the stairs before dawn. The stairwell was cold, colder than the room above, and the stone walls held a chill that pressed through his shirt and into his arms where he held the small body. Mary followed. A neighbour had found a small white box from a coffin maker on Francis Street. William did not ask how much it cost. He did not want to know what charity felt like on a morning like this.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William had made an arrangement for a horse and carriage to take him and his little pine box to Glasnevin, a 45 minute horse carriage ride. “You can sit up here.” The carriage driver suggested. William did not reply. He sat next to the box in the carriage. His calloused hands that were always busy moving now sat still, his left hand pressed on the pine box.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">They made their way over the bridge, past the Liffey, and north. William had seen this site many times, a coffin being pulled around town on carriage. He never expected he would be a passenger. Nobody offered sympathy, in fact, nobody really looked at him. William was stuck with his thoughts and the persistent bumps in the ride.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">At last the high walls of Glasnevin appeared, the iron gates standing open under the grey Irish sky. The father tightened his grip on the little coffin as the cart slowed. He would hand his son over to the gravediggers soon, and then the long walk back alone.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">They buried George in a churchyard plot that held no stone marker. The earth was soft from rain, which was easy work for the gravediggers. William stood over the hole with one hand over his mouth. He didn’t cry. He was in disbelief. A priest said a few words that William made an effort to not remember afterward.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The paperwork was minimal, only Glasnevin knew of George’s birth and death dates. For William, George existed on one document only. A folded piece of paper in his father’s breast pocket.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Later. Mary had fallen into exhausted sleep. William sat at the table. He took the paper from his breast pocket. Unfolded it along the crease. The paper was warm from his body, slightly soft at the fold. The crease opened with a faint resistance, the fibres already learning the shape they would hold for decades.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">There were the two names. Mary at the top. George beneath.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He picked up the pen. His hand hovered over his son’s name. The nib trembled, a single bead of ink ready to go. A long pause. Mary’s breathing, slow and deep. The candle fluttering.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Then, slowly, he draws a small X after the word George.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">MARY. And below it: George X.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">One stroke and then another, crossing, and his firstborn son was accounted for.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He folded the paper and put it back. He put his hand flat over it and held it there against his chest, pressing down.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c41">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Months passed. The grief did not disappear. It got incorporated, folded into their life. William stood outside number seven one morning, but he was not looking at his own shop. He was looking one door down at number six, a slightly wider storefront with a proper display window and better signage above the door. A TO LET sign had appeared in its window.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He watched the foot traffic. He counted under his breath. His eyes moved between his door and the one next to it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">That evening, he sat at the table upstairs. Mary mended a shirt across from him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Have you seen number 6? Next door?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I’ve seen it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“The front window is twice the size of ours. You could display six, maybe eight pairs of boots in that window. People walking the bridge would see them before they even reach the door. And the signage, Mary. There’s proper space above the door for a real sign. Not this little board I’ve got nailed up. A proper painted sign that says something.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“We’ve been here barely two years, William.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“A year and a half. And the storefront was the problem. I’m losing customers because they walk right past number 7 without a second look. Number 6 has a better front, a better window, and the landlord saw to the upkeep. It’s right next door, Mary. We’d barely have to carry anything.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary set down her mending. She gave him a long, level look, the look she reserved for moments when his ambition was outrunning his sense.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“It’s next door, William.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Exactly! We could practically throw our things from one door to the other.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Don’t you dare throw my curtains.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I’ll carry them like a baby. Both hands.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary was quiet for a moment. When she spoke again, her voice had changed. Lower. Thinner.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I also wouldn’t mind leaving this room. Every time I look at that corner...”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She did not finish. William’s grin faded. He reached across the table and took her hand. George was in every shadow of number seven. In the space where the cradle stood. In the silence that lives in the corner where a baby should be making noise.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“A fresh start, then. Right next door.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary nodded. She picked up her mending again, but she was smiling. Small, private, relieved.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c41">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Number six. The storefront was broader, the display window proper, and the landlord kept the building in good repair. William arranged his best pairs of boots in the window angled to catch the light without clutter. The sign hung above a proper door, twice the size of the old one: W. BOOG — BOOTMAKER. Through the display window, the old number seven was visible one door down, already re-let to an iron worker’s assistant. William had moved one door to the left and called it progress.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The display window worked. Customers stopped. They looked. They came in.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c41">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Austin arrived in 1868. William touched the child’s hand, one finger against the impossibly small fingers, and his eyes carried George, but his face carried hope. Mary watched him hold Austin for the first time and could see him fighting the fear that this one might be taken too.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">That night, he unfolded the paper on the table. Wrote Austin beneath George X. The ink was fresh. The X above it was dry.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret came in 1869. The room upstairs was getting smaller, but louder, warmer. Austin toddled around on unsteady legs while Mary nurses the new baby. William came up from the shop covered in leather dust, scooped Austin up, and spun him until the boy shrieks. Mary rolled her eyes but she was beaming.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Letitia arrived in 1870. Named for William’s adopted sister, the only piece of her he can carry forward. Three children under three. Mary managed the chaos with the quiet efficiency of a field general, moving through the cramped room in a choreography of nappies, feeding, soothing, and the occasional sharp word that stops a toddler in its tracks.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The paper grew. MARY at the top. George X. Austin. Mary. Letitia. A family taking shape in ink beneath a name that starts with love and carries death.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c41">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The room upstairs had become a battlefield. Three children were asleep in various configurations. Austin lay sideways on the mattress, arms flung wide. Mary Margaret had kicked her blanket off. Letitia, the newest, slept in a drawer that serves as a makeshift cradle, her tiny fists clenched above the folded dishcloth that passes for a pillow.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William sat on the edge of the bed, pulling off his boots. Mary folded laundry in the only square foot of floor that was not occupied by a child or a piece of furniture.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I stepped on Austin’s hand this morning.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I know. I heard him from downstairs.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“There’s no room, Mary. I can’t get from the bed to the door without stepping over two children. Austin sleeps with his arms out like he thinks he’s a bird. And the laundry. I’ve got nappies drying over my workbench. A customer watched me pull a nappy off a pair of boots yesterday.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Where else am I supposed to dry them? The room is what it is.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“That’s exactly my point. The room is what it is, and what it is, is too small for five of us. Six, counting the next one.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary’s hands pause on the laundry. She looked at him. “The next one?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I’m just saying. At the rate we’re going.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“At the rate you’re going. Don’t put that on both of us.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William was quiet. Mary knew this silence, the loaded silence of William Boog working up to something. She stopped folding.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Oh no. No. William.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Number 13.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You cannot be serious.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Listen to me.” He leaned forward, animated, his hands already describing the shape of the thing he has been building in his head for weeks. “Number 13 is the corner unit, right at the foot of the O’Connell Bridge. Every single person who crosses that bridge walks past number 13. I’ve counted them, Mary. I’ve stood outside and counted. Between two and four o’clock, more people pass that corner than pass this shop in an entire day.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You’ve been standing on the street counting people.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“For three weeks.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Three weeks.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“And the rooms above are bigger. Proper rooms, Mary. You’d have space to breathe. The children would have space to crawl around without ending up under my workbench. And the rent, yes, it’s more, but the foot traffic will more than cover it. Number 13 is where the money is. I can feel it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary looked around the cramped room. Austin had rolled onto Mary Margaret, who has not woken up because she was used to it. Letitia slept peacefully in her drawer.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“This will be our third home on Aston’s Quay. People will think we’re running from something.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“We’re not running from anything. We’re running toward the corner with all the money.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You’re impossible. You know I don’t like change. I don’t like this.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I know. But you married me anyway.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He smiled. That wide, certain, impossible smile.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Fine,” Mary says. “But you’re carrying every last thing. And this time, William Boog, if you so much as look at another shopfront on this quay, I will nail your boots to the floor.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He pulled her close. She let him, her face against his chest, her hands still holding the mending. He gave her a hard kiss on her hairline.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You won’t regret it,” he said into her hair.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I already regret it,” she said, muffled against his chest.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She knew this. She had always known this.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She closed her eyes against his chest and held on.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>