BOOKFOX BAD ENDING ADVICE:
Bad endings are unforgivable. You can make a lot of mistakes in your book, but if you screw up the ending, you're going to end up with a lot of one-star reviews. But what exactly is a bad ending? In this video, we're going to go over eight types of endings that you should avoid at all costs. And this first one that we're going to look at is number one, the rushed ending. You have to know that at the end of a long book, the reader is expecting a reward. And if they feel shortchanged by that reward, like they've been waiting for this whole novel and then they get like one page of reward, that's disappointing. For an example of this, let's look at Game of Thrones. And no, we're not going to look at the book series George RR Martin because that's not finished. We are going to look at the television series. Now, the reason that the ending of the television series failed was because it was rushed. It was because the pacing was off. HBO wanted them to wrap it up really quickly with just one more season because it was so expensive when really they should have taken at least at least two full more seasons. Now, a lot of people mistakenly think that they hated the end of Game of Thrones because they didn't like the twist. But the twist, the actual story twists were not the problem. Those were actually good twists. The problem was the pacing was so quick that the twists weren't believable. Three quick examples. The White Walkers were defeated way too easily in one single episode. Daenerius's turn wasn't convincing because it simply happened too quickly from hero to villain in a single season and a short season at that. And the third pacing issue that was off is when the pacing was sped up, we lost all of the political drama, which really was the genre of the show in a large way, and instead all we were left with was action fantasy. If the show had slowed down and used two long seasons, then there would have been room for all that normal political drama alongside the action fantasy. Listen, for your novel, do not rush your ending. Take the amount of time that it deserves to give readers that reward at the end of the book that they deserve. A second type of mistake that will really ruin your ending is an outside force saving the day. When we go on a whole journey with a character through a whole book, we want to see them as an active character doing something that matters at the end. And when you have an outside force sort of swoop in and save the day, it feels unsatisfying because the person that we invested in no longer has a role to play. And for an example of this, let's look at Stephen King's novel, The Stand. This is pretty much the definition of Adus Xmachina storyline where God swoops down from on high and solves the problem. In this book, there is a nuclear weapon coming to Las Vegas and there is a literal hand of God that comes down and destroys the nuke. And you know, there's a reason why people felt cheated after this extremely long novel. I mean, it's a thick book. They felt cheated when they got to the end and realized like, wait, that's the ending? To not disappoint your readers, simply have your main character be the one that does something to solve the problem. And if you have multiple main characters, every single character should have some sort of role to play in the ending. Now, are there exceptions to this? Yes, of course. And you might have already thought of a couple. For instance, HG Wells, uh, The War of the Worlds. It ends not with the humans defeating the aliens in any way, but simply with Earth's microbes infecting the aliens, and they die of disease. But I think with this ending, he was trying to get at a point that humans are not strong enough to defeat aliens. Instead, it was the Earth itself that was powerful enough to resist the aliens. But, you know, if aliens were really that developed, wouldn't they have taken a few vaccines? Now, if you want some more help with your endings, I talk a lot about endings in my how to write a novel course, which you can buy as a standalone course, or you can also get it as part of a bundle with all my courses with BookFox Academy. The link is in the description. Make sure to click that and check it out. This next type of bad ending kind of cheats the reader of what they've been looking forward to the whole time. It is number three, ending in the Middle. There is a book called The Last Cruise by Kate Christensen. And I read it and I thought like, oh, like it's a pretty decent novel. She's clearly a good writer. And then when I logged on to Goodreads, I was surprised at how low the ratings were. And I started reading a lot of the reviews and everyone said, "I hated the ending. I hated the ending. I hated the ending." And I thought, it's such a shame that she wrote like 95% of a good book and then the last few pages ruined it for everyone. But I knew I knew exactly what was wrong with the last part of this book. It's because the whole thing takes place on a cruise ship and they are stuck in a storm, stuck in the middle of the ocean. They can't get to shore and rescue is supposed to be coming, but the novel ends without it arriving. Readers felt cheated by that. And I can't really blame them because we want to know, does the cruise ship get rescued? Like, let's see the end of the story. We have a big storm. We have a ship stuck at sea. We want to know what happens. Now, if you're thinking about ending in the middle of the action, well, there are exceptions to this rule. I think about a movie like Sideways. That movie ends, spoiler alert, with him walking up to the door of a woman he's been fancing and knocking on it. Okay. Does that end sort of in the middle of the action before we actually get to see the relationship flourish? Well, yes, but at the same time, we do get a sense like he's pursuing this relationship. We get the emotional satisfaction that we need, and we don't need to know everything about the ending, but we know enough to know that relationship's moving forward. If that last cruise novel had ended with them seeing the ships arrive to come rescue them, then that probably would have been enough without us seeing the actual rescue. But there needed to be a stronger resolution even if it's not shown. And I have to say that an ambiguous ending is different than ending in the middle. An ambiguous ending would be something more like Life of Pie where it ends with saying, "Okay, the story you thought you knew, was it really animals on that boat for this whole novel?" Or, or was it people? An ambiguous ending usually gives the reader two options, and we don't know which one the character is going to choose. While ending in the middle, well, usually alludes to what's just about to happen. All right, this fourth mistake is a doozy, and you're probably going to say like, "Oh, no. Clearly, I didn't do this." But trust me, it happens in a lot of novels. So you have to be very wary of it. It is number four, changing topics or genre. You write a novel over a long period of time and sometimes when you reach the end, the vision for your book has shifted and so the ending has a different tone or tenor than most of the rest of your book. But your reader's going to feel that as a kind of betrayal. you've been promising them one type of book and to pull the rug out from underneath them and say, "Surprise, the ending is a completely different genre." They're not going to like that. For an example of this, let's look at The Bone Clocks by David Mitchell. The first 85% of this book is a fairly realistic book with some little little foreshadowing fantastical elements thrown in, but in general, it's very realistic. Then the last section of the book turns into a Michael Bay movie where we have immortal beings clashing together on this huge stage and I'm like, "What did I just walk into? This was not the book that I was reading. This was not the ending I wanted in any way." If you promise the readers a certain type of book for most of the book, make sure the ending corresponds to that type of book and resolves the issues in a way that matches what you've been setting up this whole time. This next bad ending might be a problem for some of you optimists out there. It's number five, the unearned happy ending. Now, let me say right off the bat, there is nothing wrong with a happy ending. Like, you want to end your story happily, go for it. Like, you have my blessing. Not that you need it, of course, but you know, I like you guys. I'm trying to help you guys out. I think a better question to ask yourself about the ending is whether it's believable, whether it's happy, whether it's sad. Do we believe like this is the proper ending for the story? Another thing to watch out for is whether your ending is happy because of, say, a coincidence. You know, just sort of like a chance of fate. Well, that seems very convenient, doesn't it? Often coincidences absolve the main character of the responsibility to do the hard work of making the end end happily. They should have to work as hard as possible to make sure the end is happy. Otherwise, the reader going to feel cheated. And a third thing to watch out for with a happy ending is whether the happy ending seems too expected. If you want that happy ending to feel earned and inevitable, then what you have to do is you have to lean against it and constantly trying to be convincing the reader that this ending is going to be horrible and tragic. That way, when you finally deliver the happy ending, we're like, I thought the author was going to go in a different direction with that, and I'm very glad they didn't. And little example here. If you end with a happy romantic ending, it will feel earned as long as you had those characters nearly break up, go through a lot of struggle, encounter physical difficulty, encounter difficulty from in-laws, you throw a lot of stuff at them, and by the time you finally deliver the happy ending, we're like, "Oh, I'm so glad." Like, they worked through all of those many difficult issues. Finally, a happy ending. I believe it. I buy it. I'm happy for it. Now, for a bad example, watch any Hallmark movie because it's always like a happy ending. You knew it was coming. You knew there was no other way they were going to end it. And usually the problems are like not that big. Like, it's very they're like speed bump problems, if you know what I mean. Like, you go over a couple little speed bumps, then it's like, yay, happy ending. I really hope that none of you have done this next mistake because honestly, it's probably the worst one out of all of the mistakes I'm mentioning in this video. It's number six. It was all a dream. Now, why is it was all a dream so bad? It is tricking the reader. When you write a book, you're making a contract with the reader and telling them that, hey, everything I told you, it was all a lie. It was just a dream. It didn't happen. That is breaking the contract. Really, what it's doing is it is invalidating the emotional investment that a reader put into your book. If you spend hours upon hours upon hours reading a book, you expect there to be payoffs for it. And when you say, "Guess what? Nothing happened." How do you think that makes the reader feel? I think a second problem with this type of ending is that it really undermines any sort of consequences. You absolutely need consequences in your novel. There has to be stakes. Decisions that the character is making, actions that the character is making have consequences. Something has to happen because of those. And when you end on it was all a dream, there's no consequences whatsoever. we go all the way back to square one and it's as if the book never happened. Now I remember when I was watching Lost as it was coming out a lot of people were worried that it was going to end in it was all a dream. Thankfully, thank God it did not end this way and that was definitely a good decision that the writers made. But there is one other really famous example of where this was done in television and it was the ninth season of Dallas. So something major happens at the end of season 8. A character dies and then at the beginning of season 10 they say guess what all of season 9 was a dream. None of it happened. Now that happened in 1985 and I think it is a testimony to how badly that story technique was taken by everyone that no other television show has used that concept in the years since. So let that be a lesson to you. It is not a good idea. But I do need to bring up one exception that you might be thinking of. What about Alice in Wonderland? At the end of that story, she wakes up and she was like, "It was all a dream." How does that work? I think it works because the entire book feels like a dream. Like, as you're reading it, you're like, "This is crazy stuff. This is exactly the type of thing that would happen in a dream." So, we're already thinking, "This is a dream." So, by the end when it's revealed, this is a dream. It's not a surprise. It's a confirmation of what we already knew. This next mistake is a tricky one, and it needs to be handled with nuance. It is number seven, unsolved mysteries. In general, if your book is a mystery of some type or has a mystery at the core of its plot, you're going to want to solve that mystery. Because introducing a mystery into your story is really a kind of promise to the reader, like, hey, you're going to find out what happens if you keep reading all the way to the end. Now, unsolved mysteries are pretty rare in novels, but there is an example. It's called Picnic at Hanging Rock by Joan Lindsay. It was written in 1967. It's an Australian novel and it's about three girls and their teacher completely disappearing from this elite boarding school. And guess what? The book never reveals what exactly happens to them. I think part of the way this book still works is that it's told as a true story, very realistic with like quotes and interviews and details about the police investigation. And so it feels like, okay, this is a true crime story. And sometimes true crime stories, because they're real life, we don't have the answer. For this particular book, that's kind of how it gets away with having an unsolved mystery. Another thing we should look at is partially solved mysteries. Sometimes this can work. And for an example of this, we're going to look at Tana French's in the woods. In this book, there are two main mysteries. A mystery that happened back in the 1980s with some kids disappearing and then also mystery happened with kids disappearing in the present moment story. Now, one of those mysteries is solved and then the other one wasn't. And that is part of the reason why a lot of readers were sort of upset at this ending. But in general, I think if you resolve the main mystery but leave minor mystery unsolved, I think that can usually work. Now, one other exception I should mention is if you're writing like a very literary novel and you're doing some sort of postmodern playfulness or something like that, and an unsolved mystery is the point of what you're trying to say. Like sometimes we don't know the answers. Like you're making an epistemological argument. There's your big word for the day. Yeah, absolutely go for it. But I would say in most upmarket novels, most commercial novels, most general readership novels, that's not something you're going to do. The eighth and final mistake that we are going to look at when we're dealing with endings is predictable endings. So in his book poetics, Aristotle Yeah. Yeah. That Aristotle said that endings need to be two things. They need to be both inevitable and surprising. Some endings seem inevitable, but if the reader saw them coming like three chapters in, that's not a very good ending. Some endings are surprising and yet they're not believable. The author didn't do the work of leading up to that ending, so it's like, "Oh, that makes sense. I didn't see it coming, but it makes sense." So, the good ending is both inevitable and surprising, and those two things are constantly in tension with each other. Let's look at two great examples of this. The first one is Agatha Christiey's Murder on the Orient Express. And spoiler alert, obviously we're talking about endings. The inevitable part of this ending is we get tons of clues throughout the whole novel that this person could be guilty, this person could be guilty, this person could be guilty. Like almost everyone has certain evidence against them. Now, normally at the end of a mystery, all that evidence is sort of washed out and like we can point our finger at one culprit and we're like, you you are the one. What was surprising about the ending of this novel is that instead of one person being guilty, everyone on the train was guilty. Oh, didn't see that coming. And yet, because the entire novel had shown the potential evidence about every single person, it was inevitable. You're like, of course. For a second example, look at George Orwell's 1984. There is a type of inevitability about Winston being able to defeat this totalitarian state. Like, bro, like, you're going to lose, you know? I mean, that just makes sense. But really the surprising part of the ending is not him pretending to go along with the state but really like a wholehearted embrace of big brother. We didn't expect his total and utter capitulation and actually love for big brother. If you haven't yet subscribed to the channel, please subscribe. If you haven't yet liked this video, please like it. And I really appreciate all of you writers out there working hard on your stories. I hope this video helped you with your ending. Happy writing.

Matesic how to end chapters:
do you end your chapters with a bang or do they fizzle out injecting more suspense into your chapter endings is a Surefire way to make your narrative more compulsively readable here are five techniques to wrate Stronger chapter endings that give your reader no choice but to continue reading I'm Melissa your book editor friend here to help you write a stronger Story number one raise a question to make the reader instantly intrigued to find out what happens next for example but then she heard someone whisper her name from behind number two create an obstacle introduce a new problem for your protagonist that they must overcome to achieve their objective for example the letter slipped through her fingers and into the storm drain number three drop a bomb end your chapter with a surprising reveal that changes everything for example the handwriting was unmistakable it was his mother's number four at a time constraint a ticking clock or a looming deadline is an easy way to amplify the stakes and create an urgency in the story for example she realized it been a week since she last heard from him a clap of Thunder Drew her attention to the window the hurricane had arrived and finally end with an unresolved emotion rather than showing your character in a satisfied content State show them dissatisfied or torn up about something for example he shut the door behind him but the words still echoed in his head it's your fault share this with a writer friend

Very Ending of the novel:
so I've spent more than 15 years coaching writers and editing their books and over the years I have slowly and methodically collected the absolute best strategies to end novels the nine strategies below aren't foolproof but one of them will probably be right for about 99% of novels so let's get into it with number one a thematic ending what's your book about is it about Injustice is it about the betrayals of love because if your entire book has been discussing a theme then you probably want to end on that note as well in Grapes of Wrath by John Steinbeck the entire book's about hunger this is during the Great Depression and everyone's out of a job and no one can find food and everyone's starving so it's very fitting that the novel ends on a scene that shows hunger dramatically the job family finds a man who is starving to death in a barn and in order to save his life one of the new mothers has to breast feed him that is an ending you will not soon forget so to copy this strategy one figure out the main theme in your novel and then two figure out a scene that demonstrates that main theme second strategy a cliffhanger this is probably the best known strategy about endings you cut off right as the action gets going which leaves all the readers on the edge of their seat or they're extremely angry at you the main worry is whether Cliffhangers leave the reader feeling cheated whether it's kind of extortion for them to buy your next book and the way to solve this problem and keep your readers from getting angry is to resolve most of the plot threads that you have going and then just keep say one as a cliffhanger and I'll also note that Cliffhangers work much better for series rather than for Standalone books at the end of Hunger Games Catching Fire we learned that District 12 has been firebomb and now the revolution has begun it is a huge Cliffhanger that makes every reader super eager to read that third book in the series or check out this Cliffhanger by Roberto Balano in last evenings on Earth the very line of the book is and then the fight begins imagine ending a book on the word begins and right as a fight is actually breaking out three the ambiguous ending ambiguous endings offer at least two different interpretations of what happened and lets the reader come to their own conclusions let's take a look at the end of The Giver by Le at the end does Jonas find a town and he's saved or is he hallucinating and about to die and the very best ambiguous sings will convince a decent portion of your readership that it's not ambiguous at all casual readers of The Giver walk away thinking oh it's a happy ending yay he found a town only after a second read or after thinking about it a while will those readers think huh I wonder whether he was hallucinating because of hypothermia another good example of an ambiguous ending is life of pie did pie really survive on the Open Seas with a tiger for months or as a coping mechanism did he substitute animals for humans and spend a lot of time with his mother and a guard on the boat with an ambiguous ending there is not a right answer readers get to embrace what version they think is right or they get to embrace both fourth strategy humor no one hates a joke I mean at least if the joke is good and if you've had at least some comedic elements in your novel you might want to end on a joke think of The Princess Bride by William Goldman the grandfather waxes on and on about the greatest kiss of all time making the grandson squirm and get super awkward or at the end of Some Like It Hot Jerry removes his wig and says you don't understand I'm a man and Oz good smiles and replies well no one's perfect and the very last line of coconut Cowboy ends on a joke about corn dogs which is a little too risque for me to repeat here fifth strategy the tieback the tieback just means that the ending refers to something previously in the book and the further back that thing is say the first chapter or the second chapter the better now there's a number of things this could be first thing is it could be an object think of the spinning top at the end of Inception that top has been crucial through the whole story in helping them determine whether they're dreaming and that's also an ambiguous ending because you see it spinning and you're like does it begin to wobble or doesn't it or two a call back could be to a phrase that's used throughout the book the Hebrew phrase timshell means thou mayest and that phrase is repeated in a heartbreaking moment at the end of that book by referring to something that's previously mentioned the reader is going to feel like the whole book is being tied up and concluded and comedians even use this technique when they do standup routines they'll reference a they made all the way at the beginning of their set in order to end the session number six the skip ahead this type of ending often Finds Its happy home in epilogues with this strategy the author fast forwards time and lets us see what the characters are up to 5 years 10 years 20 years in the future and it's usually removed to some degree from the main story like the mighty warrior has retired and is farming in some quiet Village this strategy gives the author a chance to show how the main character is sort of recovered from the events of the novel and how they've changed think about the end of Harry Potter when JK r shows what her wizard heroes are up to 19 years after the end of the book who married who who had children Etc now a related version to the skip ahead is the skip back in the road by Corin McCarthy which is set in this apocalyptic Wasteland where everything is Bleak and dead the ending is a paragraph about beauty it's talking about the beauty that existed before the apocalypse and it's just describing this beautiful trout swimming in a Pure Clean stream unfortunately in the world of the book all the trout have gone extinct so the book ends on this Bittersweet note of remembering the beauty that used to exist in this world number seven the happy sad ending you might have seen the greatest baseball movie of all time the natural it's about a man whose baseball career was cut short by a terrible tragedy and then he tries to pick it up later in his 40s and try out for a professional baseball team it's based on a book by Bernard malamud but then Hollywood made a movie but what's interesting is that the endings are completely different in the movie in typical Hollywood fashion it's a happy ending he hits a home run and all of his wildest dreams come true in the book though he strikes out and he's absolutely crushed I spoke to a person who watched the movie first and he was so demoralized when he read the book that's cuz happy endings are an easy hit if you write a depressing ending you're going to get some Flack from meters but it still might be the right choice for your book sometimes stories end in tragedy there's nothing wrong with that but if the happy ending is too cheesy for you and the sad ending makes you think I think I'm going to alienate my readers I would go for a middle route the bittersweet ending to pull this off simply end one of your story lines on a happy note and one of your story lines on a sad note for instance the hero loses the big promotion but ends up finding love I feel like Bittersweet endings capture all of the emotional notes that readers are looking for in an ending and they never come off as unrealistic or cheesy number eight description when you end a story you are trying to help the reader transition from the fictional world back into the real world sometimes that transition is easier if the last lines of the story don't have to do with the characters or the plot or the themes but instead a description of the natural world to pull this off try to describe something in your story that resonates with the main themes of your book if your book is about fatherson relationships then end your book with your main character watching a father and son walking apart if you have a character who sacrificed absolutely everything in the hopes of a big payday then show that same idea in the animal world for instance Pelicans die bombing for fish like in this Taylor antrum example boom splash the Pelicans take these kamakazi plunges into the water the way they hit not one should survive but of course they all do they come up with their beaks full of fish the reader smart enough to know that the author is not really talking about Pelicans right they're trying to talk about what the humans have done in that story it's just this nice resonance and metaphorical connection that ends the story strongly number nine end on dialogue a powerful Short Line of dialogue might be just the right way to close out your book The Count of mon Chrisco ends on a positive line of dialogue check out this example by alexandrea Dumas the count of mon krisco my dear replied Valentine has not the count just told us that all human wisdom is contained in the words wait and hope that ends on such a positive note wait and hope this is a book about unjust imprisonment for years and years and years and plotting revenge and so wait and hope is such a positive vision of what he's gone through hopefully you can pick one of those strategies for ending your book and my recommendation is to try writing say three different endings think of two of them as like director cut endings and then giving them to a friend who has read the book and asking them out of these three endings which one's your favorite and good luck with writing your ending