I wish I could say I had a hard time finding examples for this video, but it was all too easy. These are nine mistakes that I wish were rare when writers were writing spicy scenes, but unfortunately, they're kind of common. And if you haven't yet seen my video on the nine ways to write spicy scenes, well, I would recommend watching that after you finish this video. The first mistake, which you should avoid at all costs, is number one, thesaurus abuse. If you or an author you've read have been abused by a thesaurus, you can seek help. I honestly don't know what it is about spicy scenes that makes writers think like they can't use normal language and that they need to like find all sorts of cool synonyms. And for an example of this, look at Matthew Reynolds book, the world was all before them. He has this line in a spicy scene which says, "She seemed to be surfing the ways of neuromuscular euphoria." Yeah, there's there's a word for that. I think hm starts with an O. Honestly, in 99% of spicy scenes that you write, there's no reason to use crazy phrases when a perfectly fine normal word will do. Or look at Michelle Welbeck's novel Serotonin, where this phrase appeared. Offer her moist parts to my triumphant fallus. Okay, that was so bad it won a bad sex award. Like an official bad sex award from the literary review in 2019. Triumphant fallus is such a deeply awkward phrasing, but the worst word of all time that you can ever use in any spicy scene is definitely tumescent. There are tons of examples out there where this word is misused, but let's look at Meredith Duran's a lady's code of misconduct. A certain character's manhood is described as tumescent swelling. Yeah, that sounds like a medical diagnosis where you have a couple months left to live. This next mistake is one you should avoid at all cost. It is number two. Simileies attack. Now look, I'm not against simileies and spicy scenes. Sometimes a good simile is exactly what you need to convey to the reader what exactly is going on. But I have also seen them go terribly, terribly wrong. Norman Mailor, great writer. He wrote The Castle in the Forest among many other famous books. But he describes a limp male member as a coil of excrement. No. No. Just don't go there. Like your simile could have gone in a good direction and it just went the completely opposite wrong way. But I think this next simile is actually worse than that. It is in The Shape of Her by Rowan Somerville. Like a lepardopterist mounting a tough skinned insect with a two blunt pin. I want you to think about that image for a second. Actually, no. You probably shouldn't stop and think about that image for a second. That is a horrible image. It's like if Kofka decided to start writing erotica. You're like, "No, I did not need that in my life." And sometimes the examples are just wacko weirdo ones like this one from Shawn Thomas who wrote Kissing England. She is so small and compact and yet she has all of the necessary features. Shall I compare thee to a Sony Walkman? Thou art more compact and more. Now if you're trying to be funny in your spicy scene, that's perfectly fine. Go for it. Like there's nothing wrong with that. But if you're actually trying to be romantic in some level, maybe maybe hold back on some of those crazier simileies. And by the way, if you are worried about horrible mistakes in your book when you publish, Daniel is the answer. She is a fantastic copy editor here at Bookbox and she will save you from all those embarrassing mistakes that your reviewers are going to point out and you're going to end up with a perfect, pristine, wonderful book. You can contact her using the link in the description. The next spicy scene mistake is probably the worst one you can commit as an author. It is number three, impossible biology. Sometimes you read a spicy scene and you're like, I don't think that is physically possible. And that can really take you out of the scene because you're more aware of the author making a mistake than you are of the characters, you know, doing their thing. Now, I do want to make an exception for like fantasy novels. I mean, think of American Gods by Neil Gaiman where there's one particular scene where a man is completely enveloped and swallowed by a woman's privates. Well, that's not supposed to be realistic, so you know, nothing wrong with that. However, there are some authors when they write a scene, you think, I don't think you've ever done this before. In fact, I'm not even sure you have a human body. Like, you don't know how this works. Let's look at a book by Peter her called Smeilia's Sense of Snow. This is a line from this book. It's kind of crazy. I don't know what is going on here and I'm not sure it is physically possible. In general, I would just recommend trying to write spicy scenes in a way that convinces the reader like you've actually done this before. Or look at this other example from aa Gil in a book called Starcross. I would classify this one just as kind of physically improbable, not necessarily impossible, but still it's sort of beggars belief that the man sort of reaches down and lifts her up in this way. Also, if that is your idea of foreplay, I would recommend you see an intimacy counselor. The next mistake is honestly the funniest out of all of these. It is number four. God awful dialogue. There are some spicy scenes where everything is going perfectly well and the couple's warming up and the reader's getting interested and then the character has to go and open their dumb mouth and say something stupid. Check out this example by Laura Bin in the book. The seventh function of language. So he puts her hands on her shoulder, slips off the top and then says, "I desire the landscape that is enveloped in this woman. A landscape I do not know but that I can feel. And until I have unfolded that landscape, I will not be happy. I'm not even clear what is being said here, but if he gets some after this speech, I would probably DNF this book. With all this landscape talk, I don't even know where he's going from here. Is he going to start talking about like panoramic shots next? Or check out this example by Sebastian Fox in the novel Charlotte Gay. He's breathing her name and says, "This is so wonderful. I feel I might disintegrate. I might break into a million fragments." Now, maybe that's not absolutely the worst dialogue that you can write in a spicy scene, but I do think it will induce some eye rolling in the reader like, okay, okay, a little bit over the top. Also, if you're not a member yet, check out my BookFox Academy, which includes more than 250 videos on everything that will make you a better writer. Stuff like characters and plot and dialogue and sentence creation, etc., etc., etc. There's a lot of stuff in there. Check it out. Now, this next mistake is one that writers make accidentally, and it is number five, unsexy sexy scenes. Now, look, maybe your purpose in your spicy scene is not to be sexy. I mean, if you're writing about coercion or assault or something like that, yeah, you're absolutely right. It it shouldn't be sexy. But if you are trying to write some sort of spicy sexy scene and then failing accidentally, Houston, we have a problem. There are some scenes that are so over-the-top ridiculous that have complete and utter disregard for anything like reality and they're kind of blind to the very essence of what sensuality is. And for this, we're going to go to an author named Jade West in her novel Artless. In this book, there is a couple that gets down and dirty right next to a dead body. Yeah, dead body here, couple coupling here. Hm. Hm. Awkward. But it gets even worse than that because they start doing stuff like back door action with like zero lube and zero preparation and you're just thinking like, uh, this is painful to read. An excellent principle to follow is you should write your spicy scenes in a way that tries to avoid becoming a poster child for what a spicy scene should not be. Anyone watching this video should not win a bad sex award. Don't do it. Now, this next point is sort of a counterpoint to number five. It is number six, believing that it has to be erotic. So, I do think some authors get into this one-dimensional concept of a spicy scene where they think like every single spicy scene has to be erotic and sensual. And I mean, if you're writing romance, then yeah, probably it will be. But for a lot of other genres out there, you have a lot more options for what you can do in a scene like this. One, remember that spicy scenes can be really funny. Steve Almond actually has an excellent essay about how to write a spicy scene in Writer's Notebook by Tin House. I mean, the title alone should tip you off that he's going for humor here. It is hard up for a hard on, but that's a great essay to read if you're interested in sort of having some humor in the spicy scenes. Two, spicy scenes can just be horrifying. I think of the end of the Sparrow by Mary Doria Russell. One of the most horrific scenes I have ever read in a book, and it is emlazed upon my mind. It is the perfect ending for that book, but it is truly horrifying to read. A third point is that sometimes spicy scenes can be depressing and yeah, they might need to be sad rather than happy or joyful because of what you need to have happen in the plot. And a fourth point is that spicy scenes can provide an epiphany for your character. For instance, they realize like, oh, I'm not supposed to be with this person because how they're treating them in the bedroom. If you are merely going for stimulating, perfectly fine. Shoot your shot. That's great. But just be aware that you do have many more options out there for what you can do with a scene like this. Now this next mistake, it would behoove you to avoid. It is number seven, diving into the less elegant realities. So if you are going for some level of eroticism in your novel, sometimes you don't want to dive too deep into sort of the awkward sticky realities of intercourse. I'm talking about fluids. fluids of all types or farts or you can get a little messy. And whenever I read that, I'm like, okay, is this author trying to gross me out or have me enjoy this experience between this couple? Because the characters seem to be enjoying it, but I, as a reader, I'm like a little a little ewed out. So, a general principle is just try not to be too gross in your spicy scene. It is perfectly fine to skip over some of the less elegant biological realities in service to creating a sort of atmosphere and an experience between these characters and also making your reader feel what you want them to feel in the scene. This next mistake is one that I see a lot of writers make. It is number eight, forgetting about anticipation. Sometimes I see in novels a kind of insta romance, like characters meet and then two seconds later they're doing it right away. But I would just have to advise you that what is often the most romantically charged part of the book might not be the actual act itself. It might be the leadup, right? All the little gestures and all the little flirting and all the little tension and all the wondering, is this going to happen? Won't it happen? That is some of the best parts of a spicy scene. In Bernard Schlink's the reader, there is a scene where a woman tells a much younger man to go ahead and take a bath and oh, she won't look as he just robes. And then she looks and then he's in the bath and she's elsewhere and the reader is just sort of wondering like there is friction in the air right here. What is going to happen? Or look at this example from AM Holmes in her book music for Torching. Here we just have a kissing scene between two characters and it just has wonderful romantic tension to it. Don't be one of those writers that is in such a hurry to get to like the really spicy stuff that they skip over all of the leadup. That stuff is just as important. Keep it in. focus on it. And the final mistake that you want to avoid when writing spicy scenes is number nine, the rise of Frankenstein writing. So what is Frankenstein writing? Frankenstein writing is basically like lumbering onward with all physical movement. Sort of jerky bodily movements and that's the only thing that you focus on. Some of the best spicy scenes that I've ever read have, yeah, a few physical details, but then they also layer that in alongside stuff like thoughts and emotions and dialogue and metaphor. Don't handicap yourself in a spicy scene and just think, "Oh, I'm giving like blowby-blow like a sports announcer would announce what's happening on a field." And a good question to determine whether you're failing in this aspect is, are you making body parts the protagonist? And what I mean by that is like his penis did this. Her breast did this. Instead, what you want to do is you want to work on whole people doing things. This character did this. This woman did this. Because what that does is it treats people as being whole people rather than as disembodied body parts caressing and stabbing and doing all sorts of crazy verbs. Don't be a Frankenstein writer. Focus on the whole person when you write a romantic scene. If you need copy editing, make sure to click the link below for Danielle. If you want to join BookFox Academy, the link is also below. And lastly, if you haven't seen my video on the nine ways to write spicy scenes, well, please watch that