World building can be kind of a misleading term because it makes you think like, oh, I've got to come up with information in all these different categories about my world. And then you dump that on the reader and it's not a very fun reading experience for them. So, let me suggest a different term, a term that I think gets you a little bit closer to what will actually create a good story. And that is world breaking. World breaking says, I'm not going to show you a new universe. I'm going to show you when something goes wrong in this new universe. So don't tell us that a society built spellwork into its infrastructure of bridges and buildings. Instead, show us the consequences of when all the mages die out and now all this infrastructure is crumbling. So quick example of the difference between world building and worldbreaking. Let's look at a memory called empire by Arcade Martin. So world building would be okay, there's this galactic empire and then a remote mining station in space and an ambassador that keeps the peace between them. World breaking would be, okay, when the ambassador is murdered, the successor has to figure out who murdered him and then also make sure the empire doesn't take over this mining station. So, say I've convinced you, you're like, "All right, John, you're right. World breaking does sound better than world building." So, how do I do that? All right, that's what this video is going to do. I'm going to give you seven steps to help you become a master world breaker. The very first step is just to make sure that your world breaking is introducing an element of danger. So it's important to note that world building doesn't include any sense of danger. You're just saying like, hey, this is what the world is like. You only get danger inside your story when you break some element of that world. So look at the fifth season by NK Gemson. There's an oro gene who can control like geological formations and they cause this enormous earthquake that splits the world in half. and the narrator promises that it's going to lead to a thousand years of starvation and hard scrabble existence. Okay, yeah, that does not sound great for the characters. There's certainly some danger there. Or look at Brandon Sanderson's The Way of Kings. There's an assassination attempt for the king in the very first chapter. So, not only do you get, you know, the danger of death, you also get the danger of political upheaval. So if you do world breaking right, it's going to create this danger in your story which is just so much better than the information giving of world building. A second great way to do world breaking properly is to slip in emotion. So one of the problems about world building is that it can feel a little dry. It feels like there's no heart to it. It feels like it's a textbook about the world. While world breaking on the other hand has to contain an emotional component because when something goes wrong in this world it is traumatic and heartbreaking for your characters. In Red Rising by Pierce Brown, there's this special dance that they do. It's a very like ritualistic dance. Now, if you were doing this through world building, you might, I don't know, show somebody doing this dance or tell a story about when this dance was done, something very information-based. but instead the main character remembers his father doing this dance as an act of rebellion and his father is executed because of it. So world breaking gets you to this emotional connection between the son and the father and it's so much better than mere world building. So world breaking is showing how this dance has gone wrong and the consequences to the father because of it. And if you need more help with world building and with world breaking, I'd suggest joining Bookbox Lab. We have another cohort that's starting soon and if you really want to invest in your story and make it the best book it can be, we have mentors who will help you along that process. So the link is in the description below. Go ahead and click it and check it out. This next step of how to do world breaking well is absolutely key. It is number three. World breaking shows characters disobeying rules. So, world building is about setting up all the rules of your world, while world breaking just goes right ahead and has a character break those rules as soon as possible. The advantage of doing something like this is you get a main character who is active, who is kind of rebellious because they're rebelling against whatever the status quo is. And then also, you get tension between whoever the rule keepers are and your character who is a rule breaker. For an example of this, let's look at The Poppy War by RF Kong. Shamanism is treated as extinct, dangerous, and forbidden. But of course, Ren, our main character, discovers it and starts practicing it. Now, some of you are thinking right now, "Okay, John, don't I have to establish the rules of the world before I have my character break them? So, I do have to do some world building." And I would say, yes, that's true. But the danger is most writers think like, "Oh, I'm going to do world building for like half a chapter or a chapter or two chapters and then I'm going to finally get to the world breaking." And what I'm saying is it's often a better strategy to do world building in a sentence or in half of a paragraph and then get right to the world breaking. In other words, you want to get to the world breaking much much much much faster. Okay, let's move on to our next step. Number four, worldbreaking features tragedy. So world building starts with a status quo. It's just telling you what is existing in this world. While world breaking, on the other hand, is showing you when that status quo is interrupted. A great example of a tragic beginning of a story is the new Battlestar Galactica series. Robots attack and they annihilate most of the human race. We go from 20 billion humans down to like 50,000 humans. And just to be clear, that is halfway through the first episode. I mean, really, it's it's the pilot episode. It's not even the first episode. And so, one, my point is there's almost zero world building. We get straight to world breaking in the very first episode. And two, this act of world breaking gets you into this tragic scenario where you feel for the human race that's being annihilated by the robots. Lastly, if you start with world breaking and you start with a really tragic event, what it does is it forces your character to be active because they have to they have to do something now, right? They have to do something to try to fix the world. And by the way, if you like this video and if you want to see more videos like this, then I would recommend that you subscribe and also like the video and that'll just give YouTube a little nudge to show you my next video. A fifth way to do world breaking really well is to understand that world breaking ups hierarchies. So world building is all about establishing the hierarchies. Right? Here's the one on top. Here's the middle one. Here's the bottom one. While world breaking goes ahead and inverts that order or levels the playing field. Let's go back to Red Rising by Pierce Brown for an example of this. The hierarchy here is that society is divided into colors. Golds rule everything and then below them are silvers. Below them are whites and below them are the reds who live underneath the surface mining. So the world breaking in this novel happens when Daryl, who is a red, who's the very lowest, under goes this surgery to like transform his body and his mind into the highest class, a gold. And it shows what happens when he tries to undermine and destroy this whole hierarchical system. So, if you do have some sort of hierarchy in your book, I just recommend that you look for ways to tweak with it, to mess with it, to invert it in some way, because guess what? The reader is going to be looking for that and expecting that. This next point is my favorite one in this whole video. It is number six. Worldbreaking inverts belief systems. So, let's say your world has some sort of prophecy or some sort of belief system. World breaking would be pulling back the curtain to reveal that something about that prophecy or belief system is a lie. A good example of this would be Brandon Sanderson in Mistorn because he's always looking for ways to warp or twist the prophecy. There was a prophecy that the hero of ages would arrive at the well of ascension and would fight evil. And what Sanderson does is really interesting and spoiler alert for any of you who are wanting to read the book here. Basically, the wrong character was identified as the hero. the hero was actually somebody else. And two, and this one's even more clever, is that the prophecy text itself was corrupted by an evil influence. So, if you do have a prophecy in your book, you don't need to have that prophecy just play out perfectly. Have some room for misunderstandings. Have some room for the prophecy getting warped or changed. Have some room for surprise for the reader. A second example we could look at is from a dystopia, The Giver by Lewis Lowry. So, what's the belief system here? That happiness comes from enforcing sameness. all across this society. But then some serious world breaking comes along and destroys this belief system because we see, oh wait, this idea leads to euthanasia and the slaughtering of babies and zero emotion or love. Hm. Okay, maybe this uh maybe this belief system isn't a good one. Look, as writers, I think we just get like so excited when we come up with this really cool worldbuing element that we forget we need to take that next step and break it in some way and twist it in some way and have something go wrong. All right, now it's time for our last point on how to do world breaking well. And it is number seven. Worldbreaking shatters taboos. So any taboo that you establish in your book, you need to make sure that at some point, whether in this book or in the series as a whole, you break that taboo. This is kind of a check off's gun rule, right? Like if you show a gun on the mantle piece, it has to go off by act three. Same thing for taboos. If you show a taboo in act one, it needs to be violated by act three. For an example of this, look at Philip Pullman's The Golden Compass. Demons are these animallike creatures who are bound to every human. And yes, it's spelled as like demon, but I guess it's pronounced as demon. So, what are the taboos that Pullman creates around these demons? One, they cannot be separated from their human. That is just unthinkable. And then two, no other human is allowed to touch another person's demon. It's just like so shocking and revolting to even think about. So, what do you think happens in this story? I mean, of course, there's this whole plot to like surgically remove demons from their human counterpoints, and everyone's like horrified by it. And then two, at one point, a villain manhandles another person's demon and violates the taboo. Basically, there's no point to setting up taboss in your novel if at some point you don't take advantage and break them to establish a villain character or just to shock the reader or to shock the character. Look, ultimately a really great book is never going to be composed only of world building. World building is the minor part, the the part where you just establish the rule. World breaking is the heart of your story. That's how you really tell your story. Hey, don't forget to check out BookFox Lab. It is in the link below and we would love to help you with your novel. And I just want to say wherever you are in your book, whether you're at the beginning or the end or revising that I'm cheering for you. I'm on your side. I hope that it is going well for you and happy writing.