<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c17">
      <span class="c38">Chapter Twenty-Eight</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c23">The fierce Mary Margaret</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">By the winter of 1892, the Dayton Avenue house held a different family than the one that had moved in. Letitia was at St. Catherine’s. William Jr. was working his own jobs, home less and less. The older Travers children, Lottie’s brood, had settled into the house and filled the spaces Mary’s children left behind. The noise level stayed the same. The composition changed. William noticed it most at supper, when he looked down the table and saw faces that were not Mary’s. He loved them. He did. But the absence had a shape.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He sat at his desk one evening after Lottie and the children had gone to bed. The house was dark. He took the paper from his breast pocket and unfolded it. Both halves now carried names. The left side, scarred. The right side, clean.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He looked at the left side. MARY X. George X. Joseph X. Austin X. Mary. Letitia. Teresa X. William. John X. Rose.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Four names on the left without X’s. William Jr, Mary Margaret, Letitia and Rose. But Letitia was behind convent walls and William Jr. was out building his own life and Rose was drawing pictures of a world she had not yet understood. The living names on the left side were scattering. Not dying but leaving. Dissolving into their own stories, which was a different kind of loss, quieter, without funerals, but felt in the empty chairs at dinner.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He folded the paper and held it against his chest. The crease was soft now, nearly worn through. He pressed his hand flat over it and sat in the silence.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">It was not grief. It was not fear. It was the animal awareness of a man who had been beaten enough times to recognize the wind that comes before the storm. Everything was good. The business was strong. Lottie was here. Charlotte was healthy. The house was warm.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">And yet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He had learned across forty years and two continents that happiness is not a destination. It is a clearing in the woods. You rest there. You do not build a permanent camp. Because the woods have a memory, and they always grow back.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The spring of 1893 arrived in St. Paul with a slow thaw. Ice broke on the rivers. The ground softened. William’s crews started the season’s first exterior jobs, scraping and priming the houses that had weathered another Minnesota winter. Lottie was managing the household with her usual competence, Charlotte toddling underfoot, the older children in school, the younger ones in a rotating chaos that she conducted without visible effort.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret was twenty-four. She had been living at Dayton Avenue since the move, the oldest of Mary’s children still in the house. She had taken on a quiet role helping Lottie with the younger ones, bridging the two families with a patience that surprised everyone who knew how guarded she had been at first. She had her mother’s dark hair and her mother’s bearing, that fierce still quality that could hold a room without speaking.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret had seen William throw himself into his work in a nearly abusive way. She watched her mother give her life so others could enjoy theirs. With William so consumed with work, and Lottie’s needs for help with all the kids, she stepped up with a fierceness that only she possessed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret volunteered at the parish, organizing the Lenten fish suppers and folding linens for the altar guild. She threw parties for the neighbors on Dayton Avenue, borrowing Lottie’s good china and pressing tablecloths with a flat iron heated on the coal stove. She fetched the mail each morning, walking the half-mile to the post office on Snelling because the route carrier did not yet reach their block. She helped with mending until her fingers were pricked raw. Her life was humming at a pitch that would have exhausted anyone, and she had never experienced burnout until now.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She was the perfect example of her body said “no” but her mind said “go”. A blessing and a curse that she inherited. She needed to sleep in later than usual.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She had been tired for months and the tiredness did not lift with rest. She bruised from nothing. A bump against a doorframe left marks that lasted weeks. Her color had gone pale and stayed pale, even as the spring sun returned and the rest of the household warmed back to life.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She did not complain. She was Mary Moran’s daughter. Complaining was not in the vocabulary.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William had been through this before. He knew Mary Margaret was tough. She had survived diphtheria as a child, had outlasted Boston. He had a feeling in his gut to ask a doctor, just to be safe. It was hard for him to do. His history with doctors and good news was short.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He brought her to Dr. Olson on a Tuesday. The office smelled of soap and old wood. Mary Margaret sat on the examination table in her dress and told the doctor she was fine. Her voice was steady. </span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">
        Dr. Olson pressed her abdomen. She did not wince. He moved his hands to the left side, toward the spleen. Her jaw tightened. She said nothing.
        <br/>
                “I need to prick your finger,” he said. “Count to twenty for me.”
        <br/>
                She counted. Her voice picked up speed near the end, a young woman who wanted this man out of her room so she could rest. Dr. Olson stopped her at fourteen.
      </span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He took William into the hallway and discussed the situation. Leukemia. The word was barely a generation old. The doctor explained it carefully, his voice low against the plaster wall. The disease had been working on her for months. The fatigue. The bruises that appeared without cause. The swollen spleen. Even the blood looked wrong to the naked eye. By the time a name could be put to it, there was nothing left to fight. No treatment was available.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William was blindsided. He decided to stare up at the ceiling. He did not speak. He walked back into the room and sat beside his daughter and took her hand. She looked at him and knew.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret fought in the weeks that followed. She got out of bed to set the table. She folded linens until her arms gave out. Each day the bed claimed more of her and the house claimed less.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">On an afternoon in late April, the light through the bedroom window was bright and direct. Midday. A warm day for St. Paul, the first real warmth of the year, and someone had opened the window downstairs. The smell of wet earth and snowmelt drifted through the house, the particular smell of a Minnesota spring, soil unlocking after five months of frost. William sat beside her bed. Lottie stood in the doorway with baby Charlotte on her hip, giving them space.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret turned her head toward Lottie. Her voice was thin. “Come here.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Lottie carefully approaches Mary Margaret.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Do you remember after the picnic, you found my brooch, and gave it back to me a week later?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Of course, dear. Why do you bring that up?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“My mother bought that for me. She didn’t have much. But she would do anything for me. She made me feel special that day.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A pause. She was gathering herself for the next sentence. “If you can put up with my dad, then you must be special too. Please take this. I insist.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Lottie put her hand over her mouth. She accepted the brooch. She could not speak. She turned and left the room.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret looked at her father. She had her mother’s eyes. The same steady, unblinking gaze that had once held William’s across a wash house on Stephen Street.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Tell me about her, Pa,” she said. “Tell me about Mom.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William’s brow furrowed. He took her hand.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“She was the strongest person I ever knew.” His voice was rough, fighting for control. “She could make a home out of any room. Four walls and your mother, and you had everything you needed.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret smiled. The smile was her mother’s.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Did she like it here?” she asked. “The grass? The sky?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“She loved the sky.” William could barely hold together.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret closed her eyes. The light from the window lay across the bed in a long bright stripe. Outside, water ran in the gutters where the last of the snow was going. Her breathing slowed. William watched her chest rise and fall. The intervals between breaths stretched. He did not hold her hand tighter. He did not lean in. He sat and watched his daughter leave, and the room was full of light and he could see every detail of her face. There was nowhere to hide from it. The breathing stopped. The room was quiet. The wet-earth smell from the open window filled the silence.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret Boog died in 1893. She was twenty-four years old.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William did not retreat to the dark. He stood up. He closed his daughter’s eyes with his thumb and forefinger. He pulled the blanket to her chin and straightened it at the edges. He walked downstairs. Lottie was in the kitchen with Charlotte. She looked at his face and knew. He sat at the kitchen table. The afternoon light came through the kitchen window and fell across the wood.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William took out the paper. Unfolded it. The left half: MARY X at the top. Below her, the column. George X. Joseph X. Austin X. Mary. Letitia. Teresa X. William. John X. Rose.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">His daughter’s name. Mary. The same name as the woman at the top. No X after it. Not yet. His hand was steady. It had done this too many times to shake. He picked up the pen.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He wrote the X. Mary X. The same mark, after the same name, twice on the same paper. Mother and daughter, both crossed out.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">On the right half, CHARLOTTE at the top. Charlotte below. No X’s on the right side. Not yet. He stared at the two halves. The left ravaged. The right still clean. And the crease between them wore thin and developed a soft fuzz.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He folded the paper. Returned it to his pocket. Somewhere in the house the clock ticked. He could hear Lottie upstairs, the soft creak of floorboards as she put Charlotte down.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">After a long time Lottie came into the kitchen. She did not speak. She walked to him and put her hand on the back of his head and stood beside him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The clock ticked. Her hand stayed where it was. She had learned that William Boog’s grief was not a thing you could share. It was a room he went into alone. It was a room she didn’t know what was inside. What you could do was stand outside the door.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>