<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c38">Chapter Thirty-Eight</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c23">The son who stayed</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William Jr. had done what his father never could.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He had planted roots.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">In Saint Paul, working his own crew, William Jr. had built a painting business that bore the Boog name and the Boog quality. He ran jobs as his father had taught him: check the work, mix your own paint, show up early, leave late. There was a difference. William Jr. did not move. He did not chase or scan the horizon for the next city. He found a block and worked it. He found a neighborhood and served it. He married and raised a family. He bought a house and stayed in it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He wrote to his father. Not often, but steadily. Letters about paint, weather, the small victories of building a life within walking distance of where he started. He had landed the contract for a row of brownstones near Rice Park. He was training a young man who reminded him of himself, quiet hands, quick eyes. The only difference is Junior didn’t rush to have children. That bothered William. Each letter carried the same understated quality that William recognized because he had put it there. A directness that wasted nothing. His son did not write about feelings. He wrote about surfaces and coverage and the price of oil and brushes. The feelings lived between the lines.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William read these letters on his bench. He read them once, folded them, and put them in the desk drawer with Lottie’s. These he returned to sometimes. He would take them out in the evening and reread a paragraph and sit with it. Jr.’s steadiness traveled through the page. It was the closest thing to peace William could borrow.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He was the version of William who figured it out. The son who broke the pattern.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c50">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">In early 1918 the letters stopped coming. The United States was fully in the throes of World War 1. The country was dealing with a pandemic of its own, the Spanish Flu. Women’s suffrage grew momentum for women’s voting rights. Automobiles were becoming more common while horses were still being used. In this time of change, William didn’t think twice about the gap in letters that he had been receiving from Junior.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">In the fall of 1918, William Jr. contracted influenza.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The Spanish flu had filled the newspapers for months. William read the reports with detached attention. He had survived too much to be frightened by headlines. The numbers were staggering. Entire cities shutting down. Hospitals overrun. Young, healthy men dying within days. William read, turned the page, checked the property listings. Told himself it was far away.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The letter from Jr.’s wife arrived in Grants Pass on a Wednesday. William read it at his desk. The handwriting was not Jr.’s. That alone told him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Jr. was sick. Fever, cough, the same symptoms the papers described. His wife was managing. She had called a doctor.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William put the letter down. He did not move. He picked it up and read it again, slowly, searching for the clause that would undo him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He wrote back. A short letter. Be strong. Mix your own medicine and don’t trust what they sell you. And take care of his clothes, without you he would stink like his old man. He stared at that last line. It was meant as a joke. The pen felt heavy. He folded the letter and sealed it. The gum on the envelope was bitter and chalky and stayed on his tongue. He walked it to the post office himself, leaning on his stick. He stood at the counter until the clerk stamped it and put it in the outbound bag.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He went home and sat on the bench. The empty seat beside him. He sat there until it was dark.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c50">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">More letters came. Jr. was not improving. His wife wrote with controlled steadiness, holding things together for the people in the next room. Jr. had been moved to the front bedroom. A neighbor was helping. The doctor came daily.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William held these letters and read them and did not respond for days because he could not find words that were not prayers. He did not pray. He sat on the bench and thought about his son. Born at number thirteen Aston’s Quay. Tucked against his mother’s ribs in the hold of the City of Paris. A man who figured out what William never could: that you can plant yourself in one place and survive.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He decided to go. He sat at the desk and worked the route. Train from Grants Pass to Portland. Portland to Boise. Boise to Ogden. Ogden to Saint Paul. Four days if the connections held. He would wire Lottie from Portland. She would meet him at the station. He began writing the telegram.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He stood up from the desk and his hip locked. He grabbed the edge of the table and waited for it to release, breathing through his teeth. Two minutes. Three. When it let go, he walked to the door. Five steps. His stick caught on the rug and he stumbled forward, caught himself on the doorframe, stood there with his hand flat against the wood, sweating.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He thought about four days on a train. Bench seats. Station stairs. The platform at Portland where a man had to cross the tracks on foot to reach the eastbound line. Boise in the middle of the night, the cold, the gap between the car and the platform. He thought about arriving in Saint Paul unable to stand. He felt shame.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He went back to the desk. He sat down. He tore up the telegram.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He wrote to Jr.’s wife instead. Short. Practical. Tell him his father is thinking of him. Tell him his old man says to rest and get well. He sealed the letter. The same bitter chalk on his tongue. The ink was still wet when he pressed the flap shut and a dark line bled onto the envelope. He wiped it with his thumb. The smudge stayed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c50">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The next letter was worse. Jr.’s wife had stopped writing about the doctor’s visits. She wrote about a neighbor who had brought soup. She described the weather in Saint Paul, cold and grey, as if weather were the thing that mattered. She did not mention Jr.’s condition until the second page, and when she did the sentences were short.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c10 c7">He is resting. He sleeps most of the day. The cough has settled deeper.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William knew what those sentences meant. He had heard them before, in other voices, in other rooms. When a woman stops describing the illness and starts describing the world around it, she is preparing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c7">He read the letter twice. He folded it and held it in his lap. The paper was thin. Wartime paper. He could feel the grain of it between his thumb and forefinger, the slight ridges where the pen had pressed hard on certain words. </span>
      <span class="c7 c31">Resting.</span>
      <span class="c1"> The nib had dug in on that one.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">A week passed. No letter. William walked to the post office every morning at nine and asked the clerk if anything had come. The clerk knew him. Knew his stick and his gait and the particular care with which he examined each envelope before he opened it. Four mornings the clerk shook his head. On the fifth morning the clerk shook his head again and said, “I’ll hold anything that comes, Mr. Boog. You don’t need to walk down here every day.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“I do,” William said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The sixth morning there was a letter. He opened it at the counter with his stick hooked over his forearm. Jr.’s wife’s handwriting. Smaller now. Cramped. She had written quickly.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Jr. had asked for his father. In the night, half out of his mind with fever, he had called out for Pa. His wife had told him Pa was in Oregon. She had read William’s letter to him. Jr. had closed his eyes and said, “Good. Tell him good.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William set the letter on the counter. The clerk looked away. William picked the letter back up, folded it, put it in his coat pocket, and walked out into the February morning. The sun was white and low. The mud on the street had frozen into ruts. He walked home without stopping.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c50">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William Jr. died on a Tuesday in February, 1919. He was forty-eight years old.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William received the telegram at the hardware store. He read it standing in the aisle between the nails and the rope. Six words. He read them and then he read the sender’s name and then he read them again. The paper was yellow. The type was crooked where the machine had struck the ribbon unevenly.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The proprietor, who had known William for years, saw the old man’s face change and came around the counter.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Mr. Boog?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William folded the telegram and put it in his coat pocket.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“My son has died,” he said. His voice was flat. Informational. He had said variations of this sentence too many times to perform the emotion anymore.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He set down the box of tacks he had been holding. He placed them on the shelf where they belonged, label facing out. He picked up his stick and walked past the proprietor and through the door without settling his account.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The walk home took twenty minutes. February and cold. The valley looked grey and stripped. The orchards bare. The mountains hidden behind low clouds. He passed the bench in front of the general store where the family had fought over liquorice. He passed the post office where he had stood every morning for a week asking for letters. He passed a woman carrying a child on her hip. He did not look at her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">At home he sat at his desk. He took the paper from his breast pocket. Unfolded it along the crease that was nearly worn through. The paper felt like cloth now, soft and fibrous at the fold, the original stiffness gone from years of handling. The edges had yellowed. The center, where his fingers always pressed, was almost translucent.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The left half. MARY X at the top. Below her, the column. George X. Joseph X. Austin X. Mary X. Letitia. Teresa X. William. John X. Rose.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William. His son’s name. No X.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He picked up the pen. The nib hovered. The paper was so old that the ink from decades ago had faded to brown. New ink would be darker. The X would look different from the others. Fresh against all that faded grief. He had to be gentle as the paper could tear at this point.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He wrote it. William X.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Seven X’s on the left side now. The son who had stayed. The son who broke the pattern. Gone. Three thousand miles from his father, who could not get there. Who could not climb a train the way he once climbed scaffolds, the way he once climbed the gangplank of the City of Paris with a baby in his arms. The body that had carried him across a continent had finally refused to carry him to his son.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He folded the paper along the crease. The fold was so worn that the paper bent of its own weight. He did not pour a drink. He did not weep. The weeping had been done in this room already, and it had taken everything he had. He sat at the desk in the growing dark and he was still. Not the stillness of peace. The stillness of a man who has run out of responses to a world that will not stop taking.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He put the paper in his breast pocket. The pen was still on the desk. The ink on the nib had not dried.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>