<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <h2 class="c17">
      <span>Chapter Eighteen</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c29">
      <span class="c23">The open sky</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The train cut through the prairie and the world outside the window became something none of them had ever seen.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Grass. Miles of it, running to the horizon in every direction without a wall or a building or a chimney to break the line. The land so flat and the sky so wide that the two seemed to meet at a seam stitched in gold. No alley. No rooftop. No scrap of grey overhead rationed between brick walls. Just the full, unchecked reach of a sky that went on until looking at it hurt.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William Jr. pressed his face against the glass, his breath fogging a small circle on the pane. He wiped it with his sleeve and pressed again. Letitia stared with her mouth open. Mary Margaret watched from her seat with her hands, eyebrows tense. She was old enough to see that all this space had no walls around it, and that what felt like freedom could just as easily be a trap.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary sat beside William. She had not spoken since the last town, a grain stop where a man had loaded sacks of flour onto the platform and the warm, dusty smell of it had filled the car. She was watching the sky. Her face had loosened. That was the only word for it. The set of her mouth, the line between her brows, the way she held her shoulders, tight and forward, as if the world might strike at any time. All of it had gone slack, undone by the sheer amount of air on the other side of the glass.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You can breathe out here,” she said quietly. Not to William. Not to the children. To no one.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William heard her. He turned from the window and looked at her face and saw something he had not seen since Dublin. Her eyes were wet. Not from grief. From relief. He took her hand. He did not say anything. He could feel her pulse against his palm, steady and unhurried, and he sat with her in the silence while the prairie did not stop.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The children fell asleep to the rocking of the car. Mary leaned against his shoulder. Her breathing slowed. The smell of coal smoke drifted in through the window seam, and beneath it the raw green scent of cut grass and turned earth, unfamiliar, too clean. William kept his eyes on the horizon. The sun was ahead of them, high and bright, and the train followed it west as if it were the only direction left.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The St. Paul Union Depot rose around them when they stepped off the train. Noise hit first. Voices layered on voices, English and German and Norwegian and Irish, bouncing off the vaulted ceiling and mixing with the hiss of steam and the clang of luggage carts on the stone floor. The building smelled of cigar smoke and roasted peanuts and the sweet chemical bite of coal tar leaking from the rail yard beyond the platform.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A vendor near the entrance was frying sausages on a flat iron. Grease popped and spat. The smell reached the children before they reached the vendor. William Jr. pulled at Mary’s sleeve. She shook her head without looking down.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">William bought a copy of the St. Paul Globe</span>
      <span class="c1"> from a boy working the platform. He folded it under his arm and steered the family through the crowd to a bench along the far wall where they could sit and take stock.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">While he was gone, Mary had walked to a vendor booth in the corner, a local woman selling brooches and small jewelry laid out on a piece of dark cloth. Mary Margaret and Letitia followed. The brooches were nothing fine, tin and paste, a few pieces with chips of colored glass that caught the light. Mary Margaret touched one of them, a small oval with a red stone that could have been garnet or could have been bottle glass.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Ma, look.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Your pa handles the money, and we are in no place to spend it on jewellery.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret put the brooch down. She did not argue. Letitia walked away. Mary Margaret stood there another moment, looking.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William came back with the paper. Mary Margaret took his hand and pointed at the brooch and smiled up at him and told him he was the finest pa there ever was.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“No,” William said. He said it soft and stern. He walked away. Mary Margaret’s face did not fall. It held its position, as if she had expected this and had already accepted it. She was a child who understood money.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary lingered at the booth. She spoke quietly to the woman behind the cloth. A few coins passed between them. No one else saw. When Mary caught up with the family, she pressed the brooch into Mary Margaret’s hand without a word. Mary Margaret closed her fist around it and looked at her mother. Mary looked straight ahead.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William led the family through the depot and out onto the street. The air outside was cold and dry and tasted faintly of woodsmoke, a taste the children had never encountered. Not the chalky, sulphurous burn of Boston coal, but actual wood, pine and birch, burning in stoves across the city. </span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The street beyond the depot was unpaved in places, mud and gravel and wooden planks laid over the worst of the ruts. Wagons and horse-drawn streetcars filled the road. The streetcar bells clanged at every intersection, sharp and tuneless.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William stood on the sidewalk holding the newspaper. He had not opened it yet. He looked north up the hill and then south toward the river. He could see construction on many blocks in both directions. The sound of hammers carried from everywhere, and a fine layer of brick dust had settled on the windowsills and railings and the shoulders of men’s coats. The city was building itself fast and it did not much care how it looked while it did it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He opened the paper. Wanted sections. Jobs sections. For sale notices where anyone could place an ad and reach the whole city for a few cents. Real estate. Painters wanted. He ran his thumb down the columns, reading fast. His lips moved.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He folded the paper and looked at Mary. She was holding William Jr. against her shoulder and watching the depot crowd with careful, measuring eyes. Eyes that had seen too many new cities to be impressed by one more.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I need to find us a place,” he said. “And I need to find a shop.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“In that order, William.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“In that order.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He walked the city the next morning. He left Mary with the children in the rented room they had taken for the night, a boarding house near the depot where the sheets smelled of other people and the floor pitched slightly toward the window, and he went out to read the streets.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">St. Paul sat on two levels. Down near the river, the rail yards and the coal smoke and the tight rows of immigrant housing that looked familiar enough to close his throat. Up above, along a ridge called Summit Avenue, red sandstone mansions stood in a line where lumber money had planted itself. The higher you climbed the bigger the houses got. William stood in Lowertown and looked straight up the bluff. He had seen this arrangement before. Dublin had it. Boston had it. The poor on the flats, the powerful on the hill. The difference here was the space between them. In Dublin that distance was measured in stairwells. In Boston, in city blocks. Here it was measured in acres, and the gap between the bottom and the top was filled with open land that did not yet belong to anyone.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He passed a half-built cathedral. The scaffolding was enormous. Stonemasons worked the face of it, their hammers sending chips of limestone into the air. A fine white dust covered everything within fifty feet. William stood and watched them work and could smell the mineral sharpness of fresh-cut stone mixing with the horse manure drifting from the street.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He walked east along Seventh Street, running his hand along a storefront railing. The paint was peeling. He checked two more buildings on the same block. Shoddy work, or no work at all. He rubbed flaking paint between his fingers and let it fall. Every surface that needed a brush was a job waiting to be claimed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">They found rooms on Ramsey Street, west of downtown. The house was nothing remarkable. Narrow stairs, low ceilings, other tenants on the floor above. But it was clean. The windows faced west. In the afternoons the light came through with a warmth and directness that Boston’s windows had never managed, a light that reached across the floor and touched the far wall and stayed there, unhurried, as if it had nowhere else to be.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary hung a curtain. She set the table. She arranged the kitchen in the order she had carried in her head through three cities and a crossing. Within a day the room was theirs.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">That night William stood at the kitchen window. The sky over St. Paul was enormous. Wider than any sky he had known, deeper than seemed possible, its color draining from blue to copper to a violet so dark it was nearly black at the top. He could see stars appearing in the east while the west still held the last of the light. Two skies at once. He stood there a long time, his hands on the sill, watching the dark come in from the edges.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Somewhere up the hill, past the commercial blocks and the half-built cathedral, Summit Avenue ran along the ridge. The big houses. The stone facades. The lots with room between them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">He had seen it that afternoon from below. The distance between where he stood and where those houses sat was the length of a hill. In Dublin that distance had taken him twenty years.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>