<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c33">
      <span class="c44">INTERLUDE</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c7 c31">Grants Pass, Oregon. 1925.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11">
      <span class="c0"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Hollis sets his pen down. He does not pick it up again.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">The clock on the wall reads half past two. They have been at this for over an hour.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">William is looking at the window. His hands are flat on the arms of the chair. He has just finished talking about the apron. The hook by the stove. He has not spoken for nearly a minute and Hollis has not pushed him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Hollis turns back three pages in his notes. He reads something. Reads it again.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Mr. Boog.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Hollis.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“You brought Mary across the Atlantic when she was carrying your son. She was a girl from a wash house. She had never left Dublin.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“She had not.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“You moved her into a tenement on Prince Street where the water was poisoned. Five of the children she bore you died in that place or because of it. You moved her again to St. Paul. She carried ten pregnancies in twenty years. She was in her forties when the fluid took her.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">William’s jaw tightens. Blinking is not happening on William’s side.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“You said you followed the sun. Dublin to Boston to St. Paul. Always west. Always the next place. And Mary went with you every time.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“She chose to come.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“She chose to come because you asked. And you asked because you needed to go. Every time you felt the ground getting soft under your feet, you moved. New shop, new city, new lot to buy. You said so yourself. The dirt doesn’t die. The dirt doesn’t leave.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">William has gone still. His breathing has changed. Hollis can see the old man’s pulse in his neck, visible above the collar, faster than it was a minute ago.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“What are you asking me, Hollis?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Hollis folds his hands on the desk. He has the decency not to look away.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Did it ever occur to you that the life you were building was the thing that wore her out?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">The skin around William’s eyes tightens. His mouth sets into a line so hard it could be cut from stone. He grips the arm of the chair and his knuckles go white.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">He does not leave.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">He sits there, gripping the chair, and the silence stretches until the clock’s ticking is the loudest thing in the room.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Every day,” William says.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">His voice is hoarse. Scraped raw.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Every day since November of 1887 I have asked myself that question. I have asked it in the morning when I put on my coat and I have asked it at night when I take it off. I asked it on the scaffold painting that church and I asked it when I bought the lots on Dayton and I asked it every time I put the pen to that paper and wrote another X.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">He stops. Breathes. His grip on the chair has not loosened.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“You think I don’t know? You think a man drags a woman across the ocean and buries her children in foreign soil and watches her belly swell with fluid instead of life and does not ask himself what he did? I know what I did, Hollis. I know the cost. I have been paying it for thirty-eight years.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">A shadow from the window frame has moved an inch across the desk since they started this part of the conversation.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“She told me not to stop,” William says. His voice is quieter now. “On the porch. The last real talk we had. She told me not to stop chasing whatever I was chasing. She said it would kill me if I tried.” He pauses. “That was her giving me permission to keep going. It was also her telling me she knew what it had cost her. She knew, Hollis. She was not a fool. She was the furthest thing from a fool.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">He releases the chair. Looks down at his hands. Opens and closes them once.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“I loved her more than I have ever loved anything on this earth, and I used her up. Those two things are both true. You can write that down or leave it out. I don’t care which.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Hollis picks up his pen. He does not write.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Thank you, Mr. Boog,” Hollis says. “I am sorry I asked.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“Don’t be. It’s an honest question. You’re the first person who ever asked it out loud.” He exhales. Adjusts his collar. “Most people hear the story and they think I’m the hero. The immigrant who made it. The man who kept going. Mary knew better. Mary always knew better.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">He is quiet for a moment. Then he straightens in the chair.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“There is more to tell. Are you ready?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Hollis nods. He turns to a fresh page.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“After Mary died, I did what I always did. I worked. I bought land. I kept the family fed. The children grew up around me and I tried not to ruin them the way I ruined her.” He stops. Opens and closes his hands once on his knees. “Three years I went on like that. Then some woman at a church social decided I looked pitiful enough to need help.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">The corner of his mouth moves. Not quite a smile. The ghost of one.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">“She was wrong about that. But I didn’t argue with who she introduced me to.”</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>