<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c40">
      <span class="c44">Chapter Twelve</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c59">
      <span class="c25">Don’t Tempt Fate</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c43 c32">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">That first week William walked to the harbor alone. Prince Street led east to the wharves in ten minutes. He followed it until the buildings thinned and the smell changed. Fish guts and brine and the black tang of coal smoke off the steamers. The harbor opened before him grey and wide and busy.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Long Wharf was loud with commerce. Men hauled cargo off ships in teams, shoulder to shoulder, the work governed by a foreman named Kennedy who stood on a crate and called names from a manifest. If you moved too slow, the next man took your place. William stepped closer. He picked up a crate from a stack near the gangway and carried it to the line. Nobody stopped him. He set it where the others were setting theirs and went back for another. The crate was heavier than it looked. Salt fish, packed tight. The brine had soaked through the wood and the rough planks bit into his fingers. He wiped his mouth with the back of his hand and tasted it. Sharp and mineral, nothing like the sea air off the Liffey. He carried three before Kennedy looked at him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Who are you with?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Nobody. Just got here.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Kennedy looked at his hands. Bootmaker’s hands. Not dock hands.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Come back Monday. I’ll see what I’ve got.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William walked home with his palms stinging and the smell of fish salt still on his skin. He flexed his fingers. The work was blunt. Lift, carry, set down, go back. No skill to separate one man from another. Just a body and a willingness to ruin it. He thought of Mary scrubbing his hands each night in Dublin. How she could read his whole day in the cuts and calluses. If he worked the docks, his hands would tell her nothing. They would be sore.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">A steamer was tied at the far end of the wharf. Passengers were boarding. Going east. Back to wherever they had decided America was not for them. A woman carried an infant up the gangway without turning around. William watched her until she disappeared into the ship. He did not envy her. He envied her certainty.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He kept walking. The Cork man had said paint. The neighborhood ran on paint. Every crew he had passed since Prince Street had brushes and ladders and work. He would find one by morning.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He entered the painting trade the same week. He approached a crew working a brownstone on the next block. The foreman was in his fifties, Irish, slender build and a sceptical eye. He looked William up and down. William did not flinch. The foreman shoved a brush into his hand and pointed at a wall.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William painted. Badly at first. Drips, uneven coverage, brush strokes visible in the dried surface. The foreman shook his head. William stayed late, scraped the wall clean, and repainted the section. Better. Not good. Better.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">His hands learned a new language. The same hands that had stitched leather, that had held a dying child, that had counted coins by candlelight in a room above Aston’s Quay. He watched an older painter mix pigments. Lead white ground in linseed oil, thinned with turpentine until it ran smooth off the brush. Turpentine was what made the paint work. Too much and the coat went thin, chalked within a month. Too little and the brush dragged and the surface dried rough. The old man showed him the ratios. William memorised them the way he had once memorised stitching patterns. Not by writing them down, but by doing them until his hands remembered.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He came home at night with paint in his hair, under his nails, ground into the lines of his palms. Mary scrubbed his hands over a basin. The water turned white, then grey, then clear. It became their nightly ritual. His hands in hers over a tin basin. The day’s work dissolving in the water between them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She studied his hands while she cleaned them. They had changed since Dublin. The bootmaker’s calluses were fading. New ones had formed along the palm where the brush handle pressed. The knife scars from leatherwork were still visible but they were being covered over by paint stains that never fully washed out. His hands were becoming a different instrument. She cleaned them as she had always cleaned them. With care. With attention to the details that told her where he had been and what he had done.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">One evening she found a cut on his thumb. He had not mentioned it. She pressed the cloth against it and he flinched.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“When did this happen?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“The scaffold joint. A nail was poking out. I caught it reaching for the brush.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“You should wrap it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“It will heal on its own.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I said you should wrap it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She tore a strip from an old shirt and wound it around his thumb. Tight but not too tight. She tied it off with a knot so small it nearly disappeared into the fabric. William looked at the bandage. Then he looked at Mary. She was already drying her hands. The conversation was over. The thumb was wrapped.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He went to bed with the bandage still on. In the morning it was gone. Mary had removed it while he slept and replaced it with a cleaner strip. He did not ask how she had managed this without waking him. He knew better than to question the domestic operations of Mary Boog.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Weeks passed. His strokes grew confident. Clean lines, no drips. The foreman watched from below and nodded.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William received his first full week’s pay. He stood in the hallway of the tenement and counted the bills. More than bootmaking. More than Dublin. He allowed himself a moment. Then he folded the money, put it in his coat, and went inside to his family.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The painting crews gathered each morning on the corner of Prince and Commercial. Foremen came by in carts and called out the day’s jobsite. Men who had been hired stepped forward. Men who had not stood against the wall and waited. The wall had a certain population. It grew on rainy days when exterior work stopped. It shrank in summer when every hand was needed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William stood at that wall for three mornings before the foreman took him on full time. He watched the other men. Their techniques. Their shortcuts. One painter mixed his white lead too thin. The coverage looked acceptable wet but chalked within a month. Another applied primer over damp wood. The paint bubbled by August. William filed these observations away. He learned as much from poor work as from good work.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The economy was turning. The Panic had hit in September. Banks collapsed. Shipping slowed. Dock jobs thinned out. Men who had unloaded cargo in August were standing against the same wall as the painters by October, and there were fewer walls to stand against. William watched the dock workers drift into the neighborhood looking for anything. He kept his head down and kept painting. A man who could finish a job clean and on time was harder to replace than a man who could lift a barrel.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He painted a row of townhouses on Beacon Hill that autumn. The neighborhood sat above the harbor on a steep incline. Walking from Prince Street to the jobsite took him through a different Boston. The streets widened. The buildings straightened. Brick facades gave way to brownstone. Iron railings replaced wooden fences. The people on Beacon Hill moved at a different speed. They carried parcels instead of bundles. Their shoes had been resoled by someone who cared about the work.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William noticed the shoes. He always noticed the shoes. He could tell a Northampton factory boot from a hand-lasted Irish pair at twenty paces. On Beacon Hill the shoes were American-made. Good leather. Proper heels. He missed the trade. His hands missed the awl and the last. Paint was what Boston offered and paint was what he would master.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">From the top of his ladder on Beacon Hill he could see the harbor. The forest of masts. The steamships trailing smoke. The water was grey most days. Occasionally the sun broke through and the harbor turned a color that reminded him of the Liffey at golden hour. Not the same. Close enough to sting.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">A rare evening of warmth. The family was together in the two rooms on Prince Street, and for once the walls were dry and did not feel like they were closing in. Mary had made a proper meal. Nothing extravagant, just pea soup and sausages, but real food cooked on a real stove. The smell of it filled the rooms and pushed back the cabbage and damp that lived in the hallway.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The children ate at a small table.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Austin chimed in. “This morning I saw a dog chasing a cart down the street. It never stopped barking! Woof! Woof!” He dropped to his hands and knees, imitating the dog, fast and barking. He barked all the way across the room.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret, who was becoming quiet and serious like her father, smiled. The girls laughed at Austin. William Jr. banged his hand on the table making loud unintelligible sounds. Austin made his way back to the table. Laughter and play was not a currency the Boogs were rich in. The air in the room shifted with it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William sat back and watched his family. He had more opportunities here. The children were fed and laughing and alive.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary caught his eye across the table. She raised an eyebrow. Don’t tempt fate.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He raised his cup slightly. I know.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Outside, the harbor wind found Prince Street and pressed against the window glass. Somewhere below, a door banged open and a man’s voice called a name William did not recognize. The voice called again, sharper. Then nothing. Mary’s eyes moved to the window. She held them there a beat too long before turning back to clear the plates.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>