<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c17">
      <span class="c38">Chapter Twenty-Nine</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c23">You’ve never seen Dublin</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The crawlspace on the Dayton Avenue house needed a new crossbeam. The old one had cracked during the winter freeze and sagged in the middle under its own weight. William could have hired someone. He had crews. He had men on payroll who would have done it for the cost of half a day's labor. He did it himself.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He stripped to his undershirt in the June heat and hauled an oak beam from the lumber pile to the sawhorses. The saw bit into the grain and sent pale curls dropping to the dirt. He measured twice with a folding rule and cut once. His mustache caught the sawdust. The muscles in his forearms worked under skin that was tanned from decades of outdoor labor. Sweat ran down his temples and into his mustache and he wiped it with the back of his hand and kept sawing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">This was William being himself. Physical. Certain. A man solving a problem with his body because his body was the tool he trusted most. The saw rasped. The beam shortened. Sawdust settled into the creases of his clothes alongside the paint that never fully washed out.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He lifted the beam onto his shoulder. He carried it into the barn and braced it against the wall. Then he climbed the ladder with a hammer in one hand and a mouthful of nails.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He set the beam. Drove the nails. Each strike rang through the crawlspace in a clean sharp note that carried out through the open door and across the yard. He drove a nail crooked. Pulled it out. Drove it again. Swore at it quietly. Drove a third time and the nail sank flush. He ran his thumb along the joint, testing the fit. Tight. Solid. His thumb lingered. This was the gesture of a craftsman who had been trained by another craftsman. Doyle in the bootmaker's shop. The furniture maker through the glass. Every man whose hands William had watched before his own hands knew what they could do.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He climbed down. Stepped back. “Hrmm.” The beam held. The basement would stand firm for years to come.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He walked upstairs with the hammer still in his hand. His undershirt was soaked through. A sweat-streak of sawdust ran down his left arm. Mustache a mix of grey and sawdust. Sweat ran down his collarbone. He smelled like musk and sawdust.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c53">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He went upstairs to change his shirt. The bedroom door was open. The curtains were open, leaving shadows of the tree leaves on his floor. The bed was made. Lottie's things were arranged on the dresser with her usual precision.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">On the dresser sat something that had not been there when he left that morning.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">A small canvas. No larger than a dinner plate. Propped against the mirror at an angle that caught the window light.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William stopped in the doorway. The hammer hung at his side. He looked at the painting.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The River Liffey next to the quay. Golden hour. The light coming off the water in that particular shade that existed nowhere else on earth, the shade that made the river look like hammered copper and turned the stone of the quays to honey. The bridge in the middle distance. The shopfronts along the far bank. The sky above streaked with amber and rose, the colors of a Dublin evening that he had watched a thousand times from the door of his shop at the foot of the O' Connell Bridge.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He crossed the room slowly. Set the hammer on the bed. He picked up the canvas with both hands. They were rough, permanently stained by forty years of paint, the knuckles swollen from work he had never stopped doing. They held the canvas the way they had once held his first pair of finished boots. With the care of a man touching something he has made, except this time he had not made it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The brushwork was careful but confident. Rose had not been timid with the color. The amber light on the water was laid in with visible strokes. Bold. Not blended into softness but left standing so you could see the hand that put them there. The shopfronts were suggested, not drawn. A line here. A shadow there. A sign above a doorway that could have been any sign in Dublin. Or one sign in particular.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William's eyes moved to the lower right corner. A building at the foot of a bridge. A narrow shopfront with a display window and a sign above the door. The sign was almost too small to read. Turns out Boog and Boots are words that can be painted pretty small..</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He stood there holding the painting and something happened to his face that he could not control. His cheeks raised up towards his eyes. His eyes filled. Not the way they had filled at gravesides or deathbeds. This was different. </span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Rose had never seen Dublin. There were no photographs. She had never walked along Aston's Quay or stood at the foot of the O' Connell Bridge or watched the Liffey turn to copper at golden hour. She was born in St. Paul. Her Dublin was built entirely from his words. From every story he had told at the dinner table. From every time he had described the light on the river or the sound of the shoe brokers on Stephen Street or the way the gas lamps made small islands of gold on the wet cobblestones. She had listened to all of it. And she had painted what his memory looked like.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He set the painting down on the dresser. He did not wipe his eyes. He stood there with his rough hands at his sides and let it happen.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">This man who had hung signs with his name in block letters above a hundred doors. Who had spent his life putting paint on surfaces. Whose hands knew the weight of a loaded brush and the feel of dried paint in the creases of his knuckles. His daughter had used paint to give him back the one place he had left behind.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c53">
      <span class="c1">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He found Rose in the kitchen. She was sitting at the table with a glass of water, reading. She looked up when he came in. Her face showed nothing. She had left the painting without a note. Without announcement. She had placed it where he would find it and walked away.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William stood in the kitchen doorway. He still had sawdust on his arms. His eyes were red.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"You painted the Liffey," he said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"I did."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"You've never seen Dublin."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"I've heard you describe it a hundred times. Every time you talked about Dublin the river was in it. The light was always the same. Golden. Like the water was on fire but not burning." She paused. "I just painted what you showed me."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William was quiet. He pulled out a chair and sat down across from her. His hands rested on the table, palms down, slightly testing the durability by pushing down.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"The sign on the building," he said. "Above the door."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"I didn't write the letters. I didn't know what the sign said."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"W. Boog. Bootmaker." He said it quietly. "Number thirteen Aston's Quay."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Rose looked at her father. She had his eyes but not his restlessness. She could sit still in a way he never could. She studied his face the way she studied a subject before she drew it. With patience. With attention to the details that other people missed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"You described Dublin so many times I could paint it from memory. Your memory, Pa. I'm just the one who held the brush."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William looked at his daughter.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He stood up. He did not hug her. He was not a man who did that easily. He put his hand on the top of her head the way he had put it on Letitia's the day she told him about the convent. He held it there.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Don't stop," he choked out.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"I won't."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He lifted his hand. Walked back toward the bedroom. At the doorway he stopped and turned.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Rose."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"Yes, Pa."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">"The light was right. On the water. You got the light exactly right."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She smiled. He went back to the bedroom and looked at the painting again. The afternoon light through the window had shifted and now it fell directly on the canvas. It made the painting act like it was glowing. For once, William was stopped in his tracks.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He placed his hand on the painting one last time and smiled. </span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>