<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c54">
      <span>Chapter Two</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c23">Early independence</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Eight years later, the street had not changed, but the people on it had. There were fewer of them. Upper Stephen Street in 1849 was quieter than it was when William was born. Boarded-up shop fronts. Gaps in the rows of houses where families used to be. The shoe brokers still called out prices, but their voices carried further now. There was less to compete with.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William did not know what the word famine meant. He knew that the potatoes went black. He heard the older women in the tenement talk about it when he was small, their voices low against the walls. The potatoes were fine one season. The next season they turned to mush in the ground and the smell came through the windows for weeks. He knew that people left. Whole families carried bundles down Stephen Street toward the quays and did not come back. He knew that other families stayed and grew thinner until they stopped appearing at all. He once saw a woman on the corner pulling bark from a tree and putting it in a pot.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Ma, what is she doing?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary said nothing and pulled him by the arm in the other direction.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He had seen the grain carts. He had watched soldiers march beside them with muskets on their shoulders while the carts rolled through streets where children sat hollow-eyed against the walls. William watched one cart pass so close he could smell the oats inside. A boy younger than him reached for the tailgate and a soldier kicked his hand away. William remembered the sound the boy’s fingers made against the wood. He remembered the green stain around the mouths of children who had eaten grass because there was nothing else to eat. He passed the soup kitchen on Bow Lane once. The queue stretched around the corner and into the next street. By the following month the kitchen was shuttered and the queue was gone and no one explained where the people had gone either.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">By 1849 the worst had passed but William did not know this either. He only knew that the street was quieter than it used to be and that the quiet had a weight to it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The tenement filled with strangers from the countryside. Families arrived carrying nothing but themselves. They spoke in Irish that William could not follow. They packed into rooms that already held too many people. The building groaned with the weight. Sewage from the overflowing privy in the yard ran across the courtyard where William played. He learned to step around the puddles without looking down. Bodies appeared on the roadsides in the mornings. Skeletal children often were on the streets, all alone. He walked past them on his way through the streets. He did not look at the faces. </span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William Boog walked down the middle of this mess. He was eight years old. His clothes were too large and his shoes were splitting at the seams.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He passed a group of boys his age sitting against a wall, doing nothing. Their legs were pulled up by their chest. Their faces showed despair, cheekbones sticking out more than they should. They made the kind of faces of children waiting for soup make. William did not look their way. His legs kept moving past them before his eyes had finished looking.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He stopped at a window.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Inside, a furniture-maker worked a piece of oak with hands that knew every angle of the chisel tip, how the grain worked, every trick the wood might try back. He was old with a grey beard and blue eyes. He’d done this a million times as his movements carried an unhurried precision. He did not rush. He did not hesitate. He simply worked. The chair he was building took shape one piece at a time. Nothing out of place.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William stood at the glass, transfixed. His breath fogged a small circle on the pane. His eyes tracked the old man's hands: the worn wrinkled skin, the grip on the chisel, the angle of the mallet stroke, shavings flying. Everything else on Stephen Street ceased to exist. There was only the glass, the workshop, and this old man.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The furniture-maker noticed him. Their eyes met through the window. The old man gave a barely perceptible nod, but William caught it. You can look, boy. Looking is free.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William watched for a long time. His fingers moved unconsciously, mimicking the old man's movements. He did not know he was doing it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">That night, the tenement room on Stephen Street was sparser than it was eight years ago. One of the families had gone, left or died, a distinction blurred by the famine. The hanging blankets that divided the room were gone. The damp was the same. The smell was the same: coal smoke and boiled cabbage. </span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The room still held five souls not including William, Mary and James. Two beds served all of them. The children slept crossways at the foot of one bed with old coats thrown over them because blankets were scarce. Rats moved through the walls at night. They came up through the walls and floorboards when the building went quiet. William had felt them run across his legs in the dark and stopped flinching at the sensation months ago. </span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The yard below shared a single privy between roughly forty people. The pit overflowed regularly into the courtyard where the children play during the day. Families used slop buckets at night and emptied them out the window or down the stairwell come morning. The stench was permanent. It had soaked into every surface of the building and into the clothes of every person who sleeps here. A dispensary doctor visited the tenement once a week. He had hundreds of patients in this district alone. When a child died he marked it in a ledger if someone asks him to. Most did not ask.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William sat cross-legged on a thin mattress. In his lap was a scrap of newspaper, creased and softened from handling. He traced the letters with his finger, attempting to sound them out. He had been to the school at Whitefriars a few times. Not enough for the letters to stick. He was teaching himself the rest, piecing it together, learning the hard way.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">On his mattress was an empty spot. James and Mary's spot. His adopted parents were out of town, gone to secure more money and food. A folded blanket sat where they used to sleep, and the absence was as permanent as the damp in the walls. William did not look at it. He did not pause over it. He finished the page. His sister noticed and worked with him. She attempted to read to him. William tried to learn reading by reading the words upside down.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">When they were done, he folded the newspaper carefully, one of the few things he owned, and tucked it under the blanket. He lay down. He stared at the ceiling counting specks and dings. He visualized the imperfections into a rough shape of a country he will never see drawn on a map.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Outside, the sound of Dublin continued. A fiddle somewhere, the notes thin and wandering. A drunk singing a song that had no ending or meaning. The choppy clatter of a cart on cobblestones, fading. The south Dublin slums didn’t stop, even in a famine.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William closed his eyes next to his sister.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>