<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c38">Chapter Thirty-Four</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c23">Anesthesia</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">What followed looked from the outside like another reinvention.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William could not paint like he used to. He stripped wallpaper for a time but even that taxed the hip. The only other skill he carried was real estate.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He threw himself into it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He had done this before in St. Paul. Stacking parcels on the same streets and putting them in family names. But in Oregon the buying had a different quality. Less strategy. More velocity. The painting business continued under a foreman named Samuel Frederickson. A steady man who could cut a trim line and manage a crew. William redirected himself entirely into dirt and deeds.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He started in town. The first lot was on the southwest edge of downtown where the streets were still being graded. He walked the raw clay with his stick and studied the survey stakes. He stood on the corner for twenty minutes watching foot traffic before he made up his mind. The deed was signed that afternoon. He set up his business and living quarters on two parcels just west of downtown. The second week he acquired property in a subdivision called Ireland and Meade’s Addition. The name stopped him cold the first time he read it on the plat map. Ireland. He did not comment on it. He signed the deed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lincoln Park came next. He walked the north edge of town where families were building new homes. The school board was talking about putting up a building nearby. William had learned what infrastructure meant on Ramsey Street in St. Paul. Where the roads went the families followed. He had not forgotten.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">By 1907 he was buying faster. He put three lots into Virginia’s name. Two into Lottie’s. One to Rose through the convent to support the Sisters. He wired the details to Lottie in letters full of legal descriptions and instructions to file with the Josephine County recorder’s office. Lottie filed every one.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">His Oregon holdings formed a rough arc around Grants Pass when plotted on a map. The west side of the arc was open. The east side closed like a wall. William resided in the center of that arc.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He still mixed the paint for Samuel’s crew. He still checked the work, walking job sites with his stick, running his thumb along every joint and corner. But he did not climb. He stood below looking up. The looking cost him something visible only to people who knew him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The crew knew. They had seen it. Him turning his back when they went up the ladders. His hand tightening on the walking stick when the scaffold creaked. He left job sites earlier now and did not do the things he used to do. No more famous Boog gestures.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c12 c32">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The evenings were long. His hip ached from the socket down into his knee and the stillness pressed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The letters to Lottie changed. In the first years they had been long and detailed. After the fall they shortened. Two pages became one. One became half. The descriptions of the valley thinned. The business updates grew mechanical. Numbers, dates, amounts wired. He stopped describing the light on the river. He stopped mentioning the orchards.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie noticed. She did not yet know about the injury. William had written that he was “slowing down on the ladder work” and “letting the boys handle the high sections.” She had read those phrases as he intended, as the natural concessions of a man in his sixties. She did not know he had fallen stories high onto packed clay.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She wrote back. Practical, loving letters full of the children’s progress and the state of the Minnesota properties and the neighborhood gossip. Charlotte was in school now. Louise was growing fast. Virginia had started reading at four, which Lottie attributed to her father’s blood and William attributed to Lottie’s. Alex was the baby, looked like his father with his mother’s temperament.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William read these letters at his desk. He read them once, folded them, and put them in the drawer with the others. He used to read her letters twice.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He opened the property ledger and worked until the lamp burned out.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>