<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c40">
      <span class="c44">Chapter Sixteen</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c59">
      <span class="c25">Irish ghosts</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c43 c32">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c12">
      <span class="c1">Boston, 1876.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c43 c32">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">A landlord stood in the doorway. He was neither cruel nor kind. He was a man who owned property and needed more money for it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Rent goes up the first of the month. Two dollars more.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I’ve buried three children in this building,” William said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The landlord shifted his weight. Uncomfortable but unmoved. “I’m sorry for your trouble, Mr. Boog. But the cost of the building is what it is.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William stared at him. “Get out.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The landlord left, muttering that he would be back shortly. William turned to Mary.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I’ve heard there’s room in the West End. Garden Street. Other Irish have gone.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Fine,” Mary said. Flat. Automatic. She was packing before he finished the sentence. They had done this so many times that leaving was muscle memory.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Garden Street Court. West End. Half a mile from Prince Street and a slight step up, though you had to squint to see the improvement. A narrow dead-end alley tucked behind the main street, accessible through a passageway barely wide enough for a cart. Brick row houses, slightly better kept than Prince Street. A different cage.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The court had its own economy. Mrs. Flanagan on the ground floor took in washing. Mrs. Reilly across the passage mended clothes. A widow named Brennan kept chickens in a coop out back and sold eggs at three cents apiece. The children ran errands for pennies, carried messages between houses, fetched coal from the yard, held horses for delivery men who came through the passage twice a week.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">In fair weather the women sat outside in the passage with their work in their laps. They shelled peas and darned socks while their children chased each other in the dirt. The older women talked in Irish when they did not want the children to understand. The younger ones spoke a hybrid English that belonged to neither country. Mary fell in with them quickly. She was a washer by trade and a mother by occupation and both carried weight in Garden Street Court.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She took in washing again. Her hands returned to the rhythm of wringing sheets. The calluses that had softened during the tenement years came back. She worked beside Mrs. Flanagan in the shared yard and the two women wrung in tandem without speaking.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret helped. She carried the folded wash to the lines and pinned each piece with patience and precision. She spaced the garments evenly. She tested the tension of the line before hanging anything. She adjusted each pin until it held without marking the fabric. She was still a young girl. Mrs. Flanagan watched her and said to Mary, loud enough for the whole court to hear, that this one was born with her head screwed on straight.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">At night the court went quiet. Gas light from the street reached only the passage entrance. William sat on the back step and smoked a pipe he had bought for a nickel from a man on Hanover Street. The tobacco was cheap. He smoked because the act of it gave his hands something to do during the hours when his body was finished but his mind was not.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He could hear the harbor from here. The foghorns. The clank of chain against iron hull. The harbor never stopped working. Even at midnight the docks were alive with men loading cargo under lantern light. William listened to the sounds and tried to calculate the cost of passage back to Ireland. Not because he wanted to go. Because the number was a measure of distance. The further the number was from what he could afford, the further he was from the life he had left behind. The number was large. He found comfort in that.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William carried the trunk through the passage. Mary followed with the children. The neighbors, Irish mostly, watched from windows and doorways. They recognized their own. A woman on the front step nodded at Mary. Mary nodded back.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">In this new phase of life in Boston, William threw himself into painting with a fury that bordered on self-punishment. Something was changing. He was not just learning the trade anymore. He was mastering it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He mixed his own paint in the kitchen. Linseed oil, white lead, pigments ground fine. He experimented with ratios and wrote notes on scraps of paper. Mary watched him from the bed. It was the first flicker of curiosity she had shown in months.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He painted a church interior, standing on scaffolding alone in the vast space, his brush moving with precision and something close to grace. A priest watched from below, impressed. He visited a paint manufacturer, a small operation in a warehouse, and asked questions the owner had never been asked by a painter. How is it made? What makes it last? What makes it fail? The owner, amused, showed him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">His notebook filled with pages of formulas, observations, and sketches. It was not the notebook of a laborer. It was the notebook of a man who was beginning to understand that knowing how things work is worth more than most people think.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He took on side jobs. A brownstone here, a shop facade there. He developed a reputation. The Irish painter on Garden Street who does clean work and does not overcharge. Referrals came. He stayed busy.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William Jr., now about eight, helped his father carry paint cans. He watched his father work with the same focus that a young William had once watched the furniture maker through the window on Stephen Street. The cycle began again.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">At the Boston Common, Irish immigrants filled the room. This was where they all gathered. Where they helped each other. William sat at a table with two Irish painters he had befriended through the trade. Their coats were still spattered from the week’s work.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The first painter introduced himself.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Good day, mister...”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Boog,” William said. “William Boog.” He pronounced the last name the way he always had, so it sounded like “Boag.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“That’s an unusual last name,” the second painter said. “Never met a Boog before. How do you spell it?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“As it sounds. B-O-O-G. And yes, I’ve never met another Boog either. It’s a bit unusual. All I know is that my family changed the spelling over the years. Dad was from Scotland. Never met him.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I never knew my father either. James Murphy.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The second painter chuckled. “We all have messed up families. But at least James has a normal last name. William, you’re a far ways from Ireland, my friend. You’re in America now. Saying your last name like ‘Boag’ and spelling it with two O’s works in Ireland. Here? Nah. You’re confusing people.” He took a long sip of his coffee and grinned. “People are going to start saying it like what’s on your foot. A boot.” He deepened his voice and made a theatrical ghost noise. “Big O... Boooooo. Like a ghost! Boooooo-g!”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The first painter leaned in with a silly laugh of his own. “Booo-g! BoooOOOoo-g!”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Real funny, fellas,” William said. “Keep it up and I’ll give you something to be scared of.” He chuckled and shook his head. “You’re right, though. People keep pronouncing my last name that way. Is that how people will keep pronouncing it?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Yes. I say run with it,” the second painter said, his voice turning serious for a moment. “You’re here for a fresh start.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">That landed. William sat with it, head tilting, mouth about to open, but nothing came out.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The first painter broke the silence. “Speaking of fresh starts, my brother-in-law went to St. Paul. Minnesota. He writes like he’s found the Garden of Eden. Says the sky goes on forever and the land is so cheap you could buy ten acres for what a room costs here.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“And freeze to death in winter,” the second painter said. “They say the cold there will kill a man standing.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“He says they are building everywhere. Houses, barns, schools, churches, businesses. A lot of them need paint.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William listened. That particular stillness he got when something had caught his attention.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“How many painters out there?” he asked.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Does it matter?” the second painter said. “First you have to save up the dollars. Me, I don’t want to blow a bunch of money to go freeze my...”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“There’s not enough,” the first painter interrupted. “That’s the point. Half the men going west are farmers. Some chase gold. There are not a lot of painters and most aren’t willing to move for that. Every house needs paint, William. Every barn. Every fence. There’s a fortune out there for a man who shows up with a brush and a brain.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William took a slow drink of his coffee. Set the glass down. Looked at his hands. Paint in the creases. Always paint now.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Every barn, you say.” He laughed to himself. “You should have seen one of our first places. The door was falling off and was stuck open. Mary used to say she didn’t want people to think we lived in a barn.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“You married well, my friend,” the first painter said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Honestly though, why not?” William said, and something shifted in his voice. “Why not build an actual barn? A real one. With land around it and sky above it and no one on the other side of the wall telling me my rent is going up. Freedom. Room.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The other men laughed, good-naturedly, because they understood the dream even if they would not chase it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“And with frozen balls and an empty wallet!” the first painter said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">They all laughed. A hearty, wholesome laugh that belonged to the space around them. William laughed too. His eyes did not. His eyes were already in Minnesota.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>