<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c54">
      <span>Chapter Six</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c23">The Smallest Mark</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The room above the shop was sparse but clean, Mary's influence. A candle burned on the small table by the window, its flame steady in the still air. In a wooden cradle, a baby slept. George. Their firstborn. His face was red and wrinkled, his fists clenched even in sleep, as though he arrived in the world braced for argument.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William sat beside the cradle, doing something he had not done before. He was still. His hand rested on the cradle's edge, rocking it gently with a motion so slight the cradle barely moves. His face showed something unguarded. Barely visible. Gone if you blinked.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary watched from the bed. William Boog, not moving, not planning, not calculating foot traffic or measuring shopfronts. Just sitting beside a cradle in candlelight, rocking his son, and the restlessness that drove him had gone quiet, and what was left was a man in a room with his child.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">After a long moment, William rose. He moved to the table by the window and sat. From a drawer, he took out a single piece of paper. Clean, unlined, good enough for a letter. He had spent money on this.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He folded it once down the middle, pressing the crease sharp with his thumbnail. He took his time with the crease, then admired the blank paper for a brief moment. Then he opened it flat.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">On the left half, at the top, he wrote in careful letters: MARY.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Below her name, he wrote: George.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He looked at what he had written. Two names. His whole world on one side of a folded piece of paper. The ink was dark and clean on the pale surface. The letters were steady. Not the letters of a man with uncertain hands, but of a man who understands that what he was writing mattered more than any sign or invoice or advertisement he will ever compose.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He folded the paper along the crease. Tucked it into his breast pocket. Returned to the cradle. This was a new job for him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary watched from the bed. She did not ask what he had written. She did not need to.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Not many days went by. The cradle was the same. The room above the shop was different now. The fire had gone out and no one had relit it. The air had cooled to the temperature of the stone walls themselves, and up through the floorboards came the smell of the shop below, cut leather and wax and the faint sourness of the Liffey at low tide. It was a working smell that William embraced each day.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">George lay in the cradle. He was too still.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary sat on the floor beside him, her hand on his tiny chest. She was not crying. She was past crying, past the place where tears come from. Her eyes were open and fixed on nothing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William stood at the window, his back to the room. His reflection was visible in the glass, jaw clenched, eyes wet, the tendons in his neck standing out like vines on a tree. Eyes darted up and down. A couple of solid blinks and he was now focused up, towards the sky. His face twisted into anger for half a second, a flash of teeth, then it passed. He got pulled back into the room. Mary on the floor and the sounds of Dublin outside, a world that did not know and would not care.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A long, terrible silence. The Liffey flowed. A cart passed. A voice called to another voice, and the second voice laughed, and the laughter faded down the quay.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William turned. He knelt beside Mary. He did not speak. There was nothing to say that the room did not already know. He put his forehead against hers and they breathed together, and the cradle stood between them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A dispensary doctor came the next morning. He climbed the stairs without rushing and stood in the doorway for barely a minute. He looked at the cradle. He did not touch the child. He had seen this hundreds of times in this parish alone and his face carried the flat expression of a man for whom infant death held no power to surprise.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“How many days?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Nine,” William said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The doctor nodded. He wrote nothing down. He did not ask for the child’s name. He turned and left, and his footsteps faded on the stairs without slowing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William carried the boy down the stairs before dawn. The stairwell was cold, colder than the room above, and the stone walls of the passage held a chill that pressed through his shirt and into his arms where he held the small body. Mary followed. A neighbor had found a small white box from a coffin maker on Francis Street. William did not ask how much it cost. He did not want to know what charity felt like on a morning like this. They buried George in a churchyard plot that held no stone marker. The earth was soft from rain. William stood over the hole with his hands at his sides and his jaw locked shut. Mary held his arm. A priest said a few words that neither of them remembered afterward.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">No one came to record the death. No clerk, no parish register. George existed on one document only. A folded piece of paper in his father’s breast pocket.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Later. Mary had fallen into exhausted sleep. William sat at the table. He took the paper from his breast pocket. Unfolded it along the crease. The paper was still clean, still stiff. The fold held a sharp edge that sprang back when he opened it flat.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">There were the two names. Mary at the top. George beneath.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He picked up the pen. His hand hovered over his son's name. The nib trembled, a single bead of ink ready to go. A long pause. Mary's breathing, slow and deep. The candle fluttering. William instinctively knew what he had to do.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Then, slowly, he draws a small X after the word George.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">MARY. And below it: George X.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">It was the smallest mark in the world. It was the hardest thing he had ever written. </span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">One stroke and then another, crossing, and his firstborn son was accounted for.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The sight of the X turned his gut. He folded the paper and put it back. William didn’t stop there, he put his hand flat over it and held it there against his chest, pressing down. As though he could push the name even closer to the beating of his heart. Where no X could ever reach.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Months passed. The grief did not disappear. It got incorporated, folded into their life the way water works its way inside wood, barely visible but adding weight. William stood outside number seven one morning, but he was not looking at his own shop. He was looking one door down at number six, a slightly wider storefront with a proper display window and better signage above the door. A TO LET sign had appeared in its window.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He watched the foot traffic. He counted under his breath. His eyes moved between his door and the one next to it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">That evening, he sat at the table upstairs. Mary mended a shirt across from him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Have you seen number 6? Next door?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I've seen it."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"The front window is twice the size of ours. You could display six, maybe eight pairs of boots in that window. People walking the bridge would see them before they even reach the door. And the signage, Mary. There's proper space above the door for a real sign. Not this little board I've got nailed up. A proper painted sign that says something."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"We've been here barely two years, William."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"A year and a half. And the storefront was the problem. I'm losing customers because they walk right past number 7 without a second look. Number 6 had a better front, a better window, and the landlord saw to the upkeep. It's right next door, Mary. We'd barely have to carry anything."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary set down her mending. She gave him a long, level look, the look she reserved for moments when his ambition was outrunning his sense.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"It's next door, William."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Exactly! We could practically throw our things from one door to the other."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Don't you dare throw my curtains."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I'll carry them like a baby. Both hands."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary was quiet for a moment. When she spoke again, her voice had changed. Lower. Thinner. Her bravado fell away.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I also wouldn't mind leaving this room. Every time I look at that corner..."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She did not finish. William's grin faded. He reached across the table and took her hand. George was in every shadow of number seven. In the space where the makeshift cradle stood. In the shadows from the window. In the silence that lives in the corner where a baby should be making noise.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"A fresh start, then. Right next door."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary nodded. She picked up her mending again, but she was smiling. Small, private, relieved.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Number six. The storefront was broader, the display window proper, and the landlord kept the building in good repair. William arranged his best pairs of boots in the window angled to catch the light without clutter. The sign hung above a proper door, twice the size of the old one: W. BOOG — BOOTMAKER. Through the display window, the old number seven was visible one door down, already re-let to an iron worker's assistant. William had moved one door to the left and called it progress.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">But the display window worked. Customers stopped. They looked. They came in.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Austin arrived in 1867. William touched the child's hand, one finger against the impossibly small fingers, and his eyes carried George, but his face carried hope. Mary watched him hold Austin for the first time and could see him fighting the fear that this one might be taken too.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">That night, he unfolded the paper on the table. Wrote Austin beneath George X. The ink was fresh. The X above it was dry.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary Margaret came in 1868. The room upstairs was getting smaller, but louder, warmer. Austin toddled around on unsteady legs while Mary nurses the new baby. William came up from the shop covered in leather dust, scooped Austin up, and spun him until the boy shrieks. Mary rolled her eyes but she was beaming.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Letitia arrived in 1869. Named after his adopted sister Mary's middle name, the only piece of her his family name he can carry forward. Three children under three. Mary managed the chaos with the quiet efficiency of a field general, moving through the cramped room in a choreography of nappies, feeding, soothing, and the occasional sharp word that stops a toddler in its tracks.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The paper grew. MARY at the top. George X. Austin. Mary. Letitia. A family taking shape in ink beneath a name that starts with love and carries death.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The room upstairs had become a battlefield. Three children were asleep in various configurations. Austin lay sideways on the mattress, arms flung wide. Mary Margaret had kicked her blanket off. Letitia, the newest, slept in a drawer that serves as a makeshift cradle, her tiny fists clenched above the folded dishcloth that passes for a pillow.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William sat on the edge of the bed, pulling off his boots. Mary folded laundry in the only square foot of floor that was not occupied by a child or a piece of furniture.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I stepped on Austin's hand this morning."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I know. I heard him from downstairs."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"There's no room, Mary. I can't get from the bed to the door without stepping over two children. Austin sleeps with his arms out like he thinks he's a bird. And the laundry. I've got nappies drying over my workbench. A customer watched me pull a nappy off a pair of boots yesterday."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Where else am I supposed to dry them? The room is what it is."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"That's exactly my point. The room is what it is, and what it is, is too small for five of us. Six, counting the next one."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary's hands pause on the laundry. She looked at him. "The next one?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I'm just saying. At the rate we're going."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"At the rate you're going. Don't put that on both of us."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William was quiet. Mary knew this silence, the loaded silence of William Boog working up to something. She stopped folding.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Oh no. No. William."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Number 13."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"You cannot be serious."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Listen to me." He leaned forward, animated, his hands already describing the shape of the thing he has been building in his head for weeks. "Number 13 is the corner unit, right at the foot of the O' Connell Bridge. Every single person who crosses that bridge walks past number 13. I've counted them, Mary. I've stood outside and counted. Between two and four o'clock, more people pass that corner than pass this shop in an entire day."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"You've been standing on the street counting people."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"For three weeks."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Three weeks."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"And the rooms above are bigger. Proper rooms, Mary. You'd have space to breathe. The children would have space to crawl around without ending up under my workbench. And the rent, yes, it's more, but the foot traffic will more than cover it. Number 13 is where the money is. I can feel it."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary looked around the cramped room. Austin had rolled onto Mary Jr., who has not woken up because she was used to it. Letitia slept peacefully in her drawer.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"This will be our third home on Aston's Quay. People will think we're running from something."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"We're not running from anything. We're running toward the corner with all the money."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"You're impossible. You know I don’t like change. I don’t like this."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I know. But you married me anyway."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He smiled. That wide, certain, impossible smile.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Fine," Mary says. "But you're carrying every last thing. And this time, William Boog, if you so much as look at another shopfront on this quay, I will nail your boots to the floor."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He pulled her close. She let him, her face against his chest, her hands still holding the mending. He gave her a hard kiss on her hairline.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You won’t regret it,” he said into her hair.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I already regret it,” she said, muffled against his chest.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She knew this. She had always known this.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She closed her eyes against his chest and held on.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>