<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    
    <h2 class="c17">
      <span>Chapter Twenty-Three</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c29">
      <span class="c23">God’s walls</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William did what William did. He worked.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The winter after Mary died, his crew finished a job on Wabasha Street. A church interior. Vaulted ceilings, long walls, plaster that had been waiting years for a proper coat. His men packed their brushes at dusk and filed out into the cold. William told them he would lock up.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He did not lock up.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He lit two lanterns and hung them from the scaffold rails. The wicks caught and steadied and threw a warm uneven light across the nave. He climbed back up with a loaded brush. The scaffold planks bowed under his weight. He could feel the grain of the wood through his boot soles, worn smooth by his crew’s feet over the past week.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The church was empty. The pews sat in rows below him, dark and ordered. The altar at the far end was draped in white linen that had gone grey in the lantern light. He could smell the place. Cold stone and old candle wax, the faint sweetness of incense that lived in the walls no matter how many times they were scrubbed. Linseed oil from his own cans cut through all of it, sharp and clean, the one smell in the room that belonged to him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He dipped the brush. The paint was the good formula, his formula. Pure white lead and boiled oil mixed to the consistency he wanted, heavy enough to cover in one pass, thin enough to lay flat without ridging. He drew the brush along the wall in a long stroke. The wet paint caught the lantern flame and turned amber. The wall behind it was still the dull chalky grey of bare plaster. The line between the two was clean and sharp. Done and undone. He worked his way across the section, overlapping each stroke by a finger’s width.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">His shadow moved on the opposite wall. Enormous. Wavering. A dark shape with a brush arm that stretched from floor to ceiling, painting alongside him. He stopped once and looked at it. The shadow stopped too. He turned back to the wall.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The silence was total. No street noise reached through the stone. No wind. The only sound was the brush loading, the wet drag of the stroke, the tap of bristles against the can rim when he wiped the excess. Load. Stroke. Wipe. The rhythm had not changed since Prince Street. Since the brownstones of Boston. Since his first day with Doyle in Dublin when the old man put a brush in his hand and said nothing and watched him figure it out. The rhythm was the one thing in his life that had never betrayed him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He worked through two sections. Started a third. The lantern on the left rail guttered in a draft from somewhere he could not see, and the shadows on the wall jumped and resettled. He set the brush across the can.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He stood on the scaffold, twenty feet above the pews. His chest was moving but his body was not. He could see the altar below. The white linen. The brass candlesticks. The crucifix on the back wall with its wooden Christ hanging in the same position he had hung in for eighteen hundred years, head down, arms wide, suffering on permanent display.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary had believed in this. Had believed with everything she had. She prayed every night on her knees on whatever floor they lived on, tenement or rented room or the house he built her. She dragged him to Mass every Sunday and he went because she asked and because he loved her more than he resented the asking. She sang the hymns and meant them. She taught the children to say grace. She told Rose that God watched over them even when it did not feel like it, and Rose believed her because Mary believed it herself.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">And God had watched five of her children die and then killed her too.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A sound came out of William. Low, guttural. It started below the ribs, behind the sternum, a place he could not reach with his hands. His jaw clenched until his back teeth ached. He looked at the crucifix and the contempt that moved through him was not hot. It was cold. Slow and specific. The contempt of a man who has kept a careful count.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He was painting God’s house. He was standing on a scaffold in the dark, alone, applying his best formula to walls that would hold hymns and prayers and the breath of people who believed in the thing that had ruined him. And he was doing a perfect job. Because that was what he did. The work was the work. He would not punish the wall for what the God behind it had done.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He picked up the brush. Loaded it. Drew it across the plaster.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">His hand remembered Mary’s hand. Not all of it. Just the weight of it in his, the specific weight, lighter than it should have been at the end. He remembered that weight in his palm and his arm kept moving. The stroke did not waver. He went on to the next section.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He came home past midnight. The children were asleep. The kitchen was dark. He sat at the table and did not eat and did not drink. Mary’s chair was across from him. Her apron hung on the hook by the stove, the cotton faded to a color that was once blue. He had not let anyone move it. Letitia had tried, gently, a week after the funeral. He told her to leave it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The next morning he was up before dawn. On the scaffold before his crew arrived. He laid primer with the focused silence of a man who understood that if he stopped moving he would have to sit in that kitchen again with that chair and that apron and the smell of a house that still carried her in its walls. His men thought he was driven. He was not driven. He was running.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">In October of 1889, Bryant met him at the corner of Dayton and Western. William climbed down from his carriage and stood in the lots. They were larger than the Evergreen parcels. Two long rectangles that faced south with mature elms along the boulevard. The leaves had turned. Gold and copper and a dried-blood red that only Minnesota produced, color so saturated it looked artificial. The ground under his feet was soft from recent rain. Black topsoil, not the sandy fill you got closer to the river. He could smell the wet earth, and beneath it, the faint rot of fallen leaves already breaking down.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Bryant unrolled the plat map on the hood of his buggy and weighted the corners with stones.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Eleven hundred for both. Same terms as Evergreen.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William walked the property line. He paced it north to south, counting steps. He looked south toward the river bluffs, then turned and looked north toward the avenue. A woman passed on the sidewalk pushing a pram. A boy rode past on a bicycle. The elms threw long shadows across the grass.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I’ll take them.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Bryant rolled the map. “You’re collecting dirt faster than most men collect debts, Mr. Boog.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William did not explain himself. He did not need another lot. He needed to keep moving. He needed to pour money into dirt because dirt did not die. It did not leave. It did not swell with fluid and thin to nothing in a bed he had built. The boy from the tenements who had grown up owning nothing was filling his name with deeds, and he could not stop, and he did not intend to.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He tried to stay busy to avoid dealing with his past. He ran the shooting gallery at St. Luke’s Fair that autumn. The man who had chased geese out of gardens as a boy in Dublin, killed one with a plank in Boston, who hunted birds in the Minnesota brush with a twelve-gauge, now stood behind a booth at a church fair calling out scores and loading rifles for parishioners. Steady hand. Sharp eye. The children ran between the booths, and he watched them and kept working.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">At a ceremony that same month, William stood on a small stage and presented a bell to Archbishop John Ireland. He held the bell with both hands and said a few plain words. The archbishop received it. The crowd applauded. William stepped back. He looked out at the faces. His eyes moved across the crowd and stopped, briefly, on nothing, then moved on. He stepped off the stage.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He went home. Looked at his children. Mary Margaret was grown now, with her mother’s sharp face and direct way of standing in a room. Letitia was a young woman, quieter, with a stillness that made people trust her. William Jr. was a teenager who moved too fast and talked too loud and reminded William of himself at that age, all appetite and no patience. Rose was still small. They needed him. The business needed him. The community needed him. He could not come apart.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Late at night, after the children were in bed, William sat at the kitchen table with his account books. He was still good at this. The numbers, the bids, the costs, the margins. His mind worked even when the rest of him had gone hollow. He finished the books and closed them. The kitchen was quiet. Mary’s chair was still empty. Her apron still hung on the hook by the stove.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He sat there. He did not get up. He did not pour whiskey or sing or weep. He just sat in the chair across from the empty one, in the kitchen of a house he had built, in a city that knew his name, with money in the bank and four living children asleep down the hall. All of it. All of it, and this was still the shape of his evenings.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The apron hung on its hook. He looked at it until the lamp burned low.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>