<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c40">
      <span class="c44">Chapter Seventeen</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c59">
      <span class="c25">Westward again</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c43 c32">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The children were asleep. Mary sat mending by the lamp. Always mending. William sat across from her. The same geometry as Dublin, all those years ago. The same man, with the same impossible proposition. Older. Heavier. Carrying more.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William was silent for longer than usual. He sat still. Mary noticed and stopped mending. She did not ask him anything. She just looked at him. She had been married to this man long enough to read the silence that preceded his biggest ideas.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Minnesota,” he said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary’s hands stopped. For a moment her face was unreadable. It could have been fury. It could have been exhaustion. It could have been something else entirely.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Oh, William.” Her voice carried the weight of ten years and five graves. “How far?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Far enough to get away from this place. A thousand miles, maybe more. By rail.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“And you’ll do what there?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Paint. Build. Buy land. Start my own business. Not working for some foreman, but my own.” He leaned forward. “Mary, I know the trade now. I know how the paint is made. I can charm anyone. I can do this.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">A long silence filled the room.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Mary, you should know by now that we can accomplish whatever we set our minds upon.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“You said Boston would be different from Dublin.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William’s eyebrows went up. “I was wrong.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“You said America would be different.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“It will be. Just not this America. Not the one crammed between brick walls where the water poisons children and the landlords bleed you dry. There’s another one, Mary. West of here. Open. Wide. They say the sky doesn’t end. Lots of Irishmen there.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary put down her mending. She looked at him for a long time. This man who would not stop. This man who buried his children and got back up. This man who had looked at a sunset over the Liffey and made a promise to follow it. She should have hated him for it. She should have screamed at him for dragging their family across an ocean and into a graveyard.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">She did not. Because she had married him knowing exactly who he was. The boy who stood in the rain outside the bootmaker’s shop. The one who was wired differently.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Five of our babies are in the ground, William.” Her voice was quiet. Steady. It was not an argument. It was a fact delivered from a place beyond argument. “Four in this city. I’ll go anywhere you want to go. But I need you to know something.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“What?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“If we bury another child, I won’t survive it. Not my body. My body seems fine.” She paused. Her voice had thinned. “Me. Whatever part of me is still standing. I can’t bury another child. I just can’t.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William looked at his wife. The woman who had crossed an ocean pregnant, who had held dying children without flinching, who had built a home in every miserable room they had occupied. He nodded.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“I understand. I’ll provide.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He paused mid-sentence, his eyes darting around the room in thought. Already scheming.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Then go find where the sun truly sets, William.” Mary’s voice was barely above a whisper. “Find what you’ve been looking for. We’ll be by your side.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The same ritual. Bags packed. Trunk loaded. Children assembled. This time it was different. The family was smaller. Three children instead of five. The weight of absence was visible in the spaces between them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William led them through the narrow court passage for the last time. A neighbor woman stood on her step, watching them go. She held up a hand. Mary held up hers. No words needed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c24">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The family stood on the platform at the Boston train station. A westbound train idled, breathing steam. Other passengers boarded, families and single men looking for work, a few with the haunted eyes of people running from something.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William held the tickets. Five. Not seven. He counted them anyway.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Mary looked back toward the city. Boston. The place that had taken four of her children. She did not say goodbye. She turned her back on it with the deliberate finality of someone closing a book she never wanted to read again.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">Letitia looked up at William. “Pa, where are we going?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“West.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“What’s west?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William looked at the sky. For the first time since Joseph died, something stirred in his face. Not hope exactly. He was too damaged for that. Something lower. More durable. Determination. The same force that had put him outside the bootmaker’s door in the rain when he was twelve years old.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">“Everything.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">He lifted the trunk onto the train. The children boarded. Mary took his hand on the steps, the same gesture from Stephen Street, a lifetime ago.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">The train began to move. Boston slid past the windows. The brick, the narrow streets, the church spires, the graveyards. All of it falling away.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c5">
      <span class="c1">William sat by the window. Mary leaned against him, eyes closed. The children settled. The train picked up speed, heading west. Fields replaced buildings. Trees replaced brick. The sky, gradually, impossibly, opened.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William watched the land flatten and the horizon push back until there was more sky than he had ever seen in his life. He pressed his hand flat against his breast pocket. The paper was there. The names were there. The train kept going.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>