<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h1 class="c30">
      <span class="c47">PROLOGUE</span>
    </h1>
    <p class="c27">
      <span class="c42 c31">The Afternoon</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c27">
      <span class="c7">Grants Pass, Oregon — 1925</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c22">
      <span class="c6"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c22">
      <span class="c6"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c57">
      <span class="c7">The smell of fresh-cut lumber climbs the stairwell from the hardware store on the ground floor. It mixes with something cleaner up here, fresh paper and ink, the smell of productivity.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">William Boog climbs the stairs slowly. He is eighty-four years old. His hair has gone fully white. His suit has taken on a permanent shape from seasons of wear. His walking stick is in his right hand. His left hand grips the railing with the patience of a man who has learned not to argue with his own body. Paint still lives under the fingernails. The knuckles are swollen now.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">He reaches the landing and pauses. Not defeated. Negotiating. He adjusts his collar. Smooths his jacket. He blows up from his bottom lip, making his mustache wave a little. Then he opens the door.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">An oak desk sits near the window, a well-used typewriter and a framed picture on its surface. Surrounding the desk is two leather chairs. Bookshelves lined with legal volumes whose spines have cracked from use. A clock ticks on the wall. Through the window behind the desk, the Siskiyou Mountains hold their green line against a pale afternoon sky.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">The attorney stands to greet him. Hollis. Forties. His handshake is firm but not competitive.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">“Mr. Boog. Thank you for coming in. Please.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c1">He stows his hat and coat and takes a seat. His eyes move across the room in a quick sweep. He has read every room he has entered since he was a boy.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c1">Hollis opens an oak filing cabinet positioned behind his desk. William glances at the folders already inside. Dozens of them. He is not the first man to sit in this chair and put his name to a final document. Hollis pulls out a folder with empty forms and paper and sets it neatly on his desk.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">“You hired me for the entire afternoon,” Hollis says, settling into his chair and opening a leather folder. “So let’s take our time. Let’s get this will done properly. I’ll ask you some questions, get to know you, and write some notes. Once I have what I think we need, we will type out your official will, signed and witnessed.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">“I appreciate that.” William’s voice is lower than it was in younger years. It still carries the ghost of a Dublin accent that sixty years in America has not fully erased. The vowels are American now. The consonants still belong to Ireland. His Rs slightly roll.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">Hollis uncaps his pen. Writes the date at the top of a fresh page. He glances at the name on his appointment ledger.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">“Boog.” He looks up. “That’s an unusual name, if you don’t mind my saying. I’ve lived in this valley for fifteen years and I don’t think I’ve come across it before. Where does it come from?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">William’s thumb traces his knee, a slow rotation.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">“It doesn’t come from anywhere. That’s the honest answer. My mother chose the name William. Nobody handed her a family Bible with Boog written in the front. No grandfather passed it down over a Sunday dinner. It came from a Scottish father that I never knew. Except I heard they spelled it differently, BoAg from what I was told. I was raised by distant cousins but they spelled it BoOg.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">Hollis watches him. The old man's voice stays level. No hesitation, no weight on any particular word.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">“Well,” Hollis says, “a will is a document that carries a name forward. That’s the whole point of it. Your name, your property, your wishes, set down so it outlasts you.” He pauses. “Before we get to assets and beneficiaries, I find it helps to know a little about the man whose name goes at the top. Tell me about yourself, Mr. Boog. Where did you come from?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">William is quiet. He has talked to many people in his life, but doesn’t talk about his past. He should have expected this question. The words are there. He just hasn't said them out loud in a long time.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">His hand goes to his breast pocket. Inside is a piece of paper, folded once down the middle, carried so long the crease has nearly worn through. Hollis does not know about this paper. He will, before the afternoon is done.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">“I was born in a tenement on Stephen Street in Dublin,” William says. “November of 1841. My mother was on her own. She was young. The tenements had a way of making age difficult to judge.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">He pauses. His eyes have left Hollis and moved to the window, to the mountains, to somewhere far past the mountains.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">“She chose my Catholic name herself. Weeks before I arrived. I don’t know the influence behind why she picked William.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">Hollis has stopped writing. His pen rests on the page.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">William is quiet for a moment. He looks down at his hands in his lap. Turns them over once, slowly, as if checking whether they still belong to him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">“It was no place to raise a child,” he says. “But she did it anyway.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">He stops there. Not because he is finished. Because he is deciding how far back to go. Hollis waits. The clock ticks. Through the window, a cloud moves across the sun and the light on the desk dims and returns.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">Outside, the weather is turning. A fall shower has crept into the valley. Rain taps the gutters of G Street and finds the drainpipe of the hardware store below. A soft, steady drip against stone.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c19">
      <span class="c7">William hears it. His eyes close.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>