<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c17" id="h.pbbvkv1c4nui">
      <span>Chapter Twenty-Seven</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c23">Scattered like bugs</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c7">Letitia was the first to leave.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She had always been the quiet center of the family. The child who shared her food without being asked on the ship from Queenstown. The girl who folded her hands and prayed while her siblings slept through storms. The young woman who sat in the corner of every loud room with a calm that had no business belonging to someone her age. William had watched this quality grow in her across the years and he had never quite known what to call it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A Sunday morning in the late summer of 1892. Letitia was twenty-three. She sat at the breakfast table in the Dayton Avenue house, surrounded by the noise of the children, and she was somewhere else entirely. Her hands were in her lap. Her plate was untouched. Her eyes were fixed on the window where the early light came through in beams and lit the dust that floated in the still air.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William noticed. He noticed her when others did not because she was the easiest to miss.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">After breakfast, she found him alone on the porch.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Pa, I need to tell you something.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He looked at her. She had Mary’s eyes. Not Mary Margaret’s version of them, which carried heat and stubbornness. Letitia’s eyes were her mother’s at their most still.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">That morning before breakfast Letitia had been in the garden. The first frost of autumn had arrived overnight. She knelt in the dirt and cut the last of the basil before the cold killed it. She stripped the leaves from the stems and laid them on a cloth on the kitchen counter to dry. She brushed the soil from her knees. She washed her hands at the basin. She dried them on her apron and folded the apron and hung it on the hook by the stove.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She had been tending that garden for fourteen years now. Every house the family occupied she found the patch of earth and worked it. The Ramsey Street plot. The Evergreen Avenue beds. The Dayton Avenue garden that she had expanded three times until it ran the full width of the yard. She grew herbs for cooking and flowers for the table and tomatoes that Mary Margaret distributed to the neighbors. The garden was the only thing Letitia had ever built for herself. She built it the same way every year. Quietly. Without asking permission. Without announcing results.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Rose had offered to paint the garden fence and look after it. Letitia said that it wasn’t necessary that but smiled when she said it. The garden was hers. The planning of it. The weeding of it. She could tell by touch whether a plant needed water. She could smell the difference between healthy soil and exhausted soil. These were not skills she had learned from a book. They were skills that had grown in her the way the basil grew. Because the conditions were right.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I’ve been accepted at St. Catherine’s.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William said nothing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I’ve been thinking about this for a long time. Since before we left Boston. Since before Ma died. I don’t know how to explain it except that I’ve always felt called, and I’ve spent years telling myself it was something else.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“A nun.” William’s voice was flat. Not angry. Processing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Sister Berissima. That’s the name I’ve chosen.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“That’s not your name. Your name is Letitia Boog.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“It will still be my name. It will always be my name. But this is what I’m meant to do. I know it the same way you knew you were supposed to leave Dublin. The same way you knew about the corner shop on Aston’s Quay, and Minnesota, and all of it. You’ve spent your whole life chasing something, Pa. I’ve spent mine wanting to stay still. You’ve never been able to explain that feeling, have you? The pull toward something you can’t see yet?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William looked at his daughter. She had just described his entire life back to him, and she was right, and he hated that she was right because it meant he could not argue with her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Your mother would have understood this,” he said. Quiet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I think Ma is the reason I understand it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A long silence. The Sunday bells were ringing somewhere across the city. They had irritated him for years, those bells. Every toll another knock on a door he had shut. But standing here with his daughter, he listened, and for once the sound did not irritate him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“St. Catherine’s,” he said. “Is it a good place?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“It’s a good place.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He nodded. The nod took a long time. When it was done, he put his hand on Letitia’s head, and held it there.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You were the first name on the manifest, you know. You and Teresa. Passengers one and two on the City of Paris. Four years old and you didn’t cry.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I remember.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“No you don’t.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She smiled. “No. But you’ve told me enough times that I feel like I do.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Letitia left for St. Catherine’s before the leaves turned. William drove her in the carriage. They did not speak for most of the ride. At the gate, she stepped down with a single bag. She hugged him, brief and fierce, and he held on longer than she expected. When she pulled back his eyes were wet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“None of that, Pa. I’ll write.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You’d better.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She walked through the gate. He watched until the door closed behind her. Then he sat in the carriage for a long time, alone, with the reins slack in his hands. Three of Mary’s children remained. Mary Margaret, William Jr. and Rose. The number was shrinking, and each departure pulled something out of him that he could not put back.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">It wasn’t too long after Letitia left that William felt the urge to spend more time with his remaining children. Rose, his youngest, had him wrapped around her finger. Her words alone could mean nothing and still tug at his heart-strings.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William Jr. was twenty-one by now, built solid, his father’s hands and his mother’s quiet stubbornness. He attempted to grow a mustache, but it was still thin, and reddish brown. He had been working alongside William since he was eight years old, carrying paint cans, learning the trade, absorbing the rhythms of a business built from nothing. But he had begun talking about his own path. Contractors he had met. Opportunities outside his father’s crew. The restlessness was familiar. William recognized it because he had invented it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">One evening, William Jr. stood in the doorway of the shop. Like his old man, he did not beat around the bush.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I got an offer to work a job out in Saint Paul. A foreman I met at the Hansen project. He wants me to run a crew.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“When?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Next month.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William set down his brush. He looked at his son. This boy who had been born at Number Thirteen Aston’s Quay, who had crossed an ocean at two years old tucked against his mother’s ribs, who had watched his siblings die in a Boston tenement, who had sat in a carriage at fifteen and told his father it was okay to love again. This boy was leaving.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Run it well,” William said. “And mix your own paint. Don’t trust what they sell you.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William Jr. smiled. His father’s half-smile, contained, earned.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c15">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c11 c21">
      <span class="c1"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Rose remained. She was the youngest of Mary’s children, and she was becoming someone William had not anticipated. She painted. Not houses. Not casually, not as a pastime, but with the same obsessive focus William had brought to leather and paint. She sat at the kitchen table with scraps of paper and a small brush and sketched faces, buildings, trees, the view from the Dayton Avenue windows. Her lines were clean and confident. She had an eye.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William found her one afternoon painting the front of the house. She had captured the porch columns, the angle of the roof, the shadow patterns on the clapboard, all with a precision that startled him. He looked at the drawing, then at the house, then back at the drawing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Where did you learn that?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I watched you.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I’m a painter, Rose. Not an artist.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“You’re both. You just don’t know it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">He looked at her. She had Mary’s soft eyes and strong jawline and something else, something that did not come from either parent. A way of seeing the world as a composition. Colors and shadow and line.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Rose, when you were a little girl, do you remember what I asked you often?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She crinkled her nose and shrugged her shoulders.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“I asked if I could put you in my pocket, so you’d always be with me. So how bout it, can I just keep you in my pocket?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She looked down, then looked at him with a sideways smile.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Be careful, I could steal your paintbrush while I’m in there.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">A silence settled between them. William gave her one pat on the shoulder and walked off. The pocket of warmth inside of him was something he clung onto dearly.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>