<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c38">Chapter Thirty-Five</span>
      <span class="c7">
        <br/>
      </span>
      <span class="c7 c31">Twelve by twelve</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">It started with the smell of wet plaster.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">A morning in the house. William came downstairs and he was having the hallway replastered. The workman had mixed the compound that morning and the smell filled the stairwell with damp calcium and chalk. There was something else to it. Something underneath that had no name but triggered a response so immediate that William stopped on the landing with one hand on the railing and the other pressed flat against his chest.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">His body had played a trick on his mind. The damp plaster. The moisture in the air. The narrow stairwell with the ceiling too low and the walls too close. A blanket pinned over a window. His lungs tightened. His skin prickled. He stood on that landing and he was not in Oregon. He was in a room twelve feet by twelve feet on Stephen Street in Dublin. He was eight years old. The ceiling was too close. He was crowded yet all alone at the same time. All that was missing was the straw mattress and lone candle, but he could even visualize that too. His throat closed. He pressed his back against the wall and slid down until he was sitting on the landing. Hip pain didn’t matter.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He gripped the railing until the moment passed. The workman looked up from his trowel.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“You alright, Mr. Boog?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Fine.” William descended the stairs. His hip screamed on every step. He walked through the front door and stood on the porch and breathed the Oregon air until the plaster smell was gone and his hands stopped shaking. He muttered something to himself before continuing on his way.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">It happened again. And again. Not every day. Not predictably. Enough.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">A family at the general store, a single mother and four children, pressed together in the narrow aisle between shelves. They were loud and knocking cans to the floor. Too many bodies in too small a space. William felt his throat close. He left the store until they were done. He went back inside for the can of linseed oil he had come for.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Walking home he saw that same family on a bench. The kids were fighting over liquorice sticks. The younger brother said, “Please, I’m starving!”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Even though it shouldn’t have, it infuriated William. He watched neighbor boys starve to death during the Great Famine in Dublin.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“You don’t say that, young fella! There are people starving all over the world. Be grateful that you have a mother who takes care of you!”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William was unsure who was more surprised that he said that, the mother or himself.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The rest of his walk home pulled at him from every direction. A baby crying in the distance. Someone yelling in the street, even if it was just a newspaper vendor. A garden outside that smelled both of cabbage and Letitia’s herbs.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Without paint, without the ladder, without the physical exhaustion that had kept his mind occupied for four decades, William was being forced to sit with thoughts he had outrun across a continent. The grief he had folded into motion was unfolding now, in the silence of a bedroom. The empty hours between contracts when Oregon had a special way of standing still.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">A night in late winter. Rain patters the roof. His house was quiet. William sat at his desk with the property ledger open next to the small glass of whiskey. The lamp was low.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He was not working. He was staring at the wall. The wallpaper had a pattern of small flowers that repeated every six inches. He counted them. He counted them again. His mind was doing something it had never done before, cycling, looping, pulling him backward through rooms he had sealed shut.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">His breathing hastened. He went clammy and sweaty at the same time. He pressed his palms against his temples. It was no use. In desperation he banged the table. He immediately felt a release. He did it again harder. Then again. Each thud bringing less of a release and morphing into futility. The sound cracked through the empty house.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The gut-wrenching, soul-sucking feeling of isolation and neglect from Dublin had crept back. “You’re just a little boy from the slums” played over and over in his head. The damp walls. The blanket partitions. That wet cabbage and death smell came to mind. Visions of mothers carrying their dead in Dublin. Then Mary on the mattress with George, who was still. Teresa in the bed, her breathing a wet rasp. Austin asking if they were going to move again. John in the rocking chair, Mary holding him, the runners creaking on the floor. Joseph’s mewling growing weaker. His wet and lifeless stillborn. Mary Margaret lying weak and frail.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">His hands began to shake. Not the tremor of age. A deep, structural shaking that started in his fingers, leading to his biceps contracting, then his body quivering. He pushed the ledger away. He pushed the glass away. He put his elbows on the desk and his face in his hands. He could only get out one word.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Why?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He wept.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Not the way he had wept after Mary died. This was different. This came from the basement of him, from the place where a man stores the things he has spent a lifetime refusing to feel. It did not sound like crying. It wasn’t crying. It sounded like something structural giving way. Support beams cracking. Load-bearing walls coming down. Groans and moans.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He wept for George, who had lived nine days in Dublin. For Joseph, who had lived seven months in Boston. For Austin, who loved his fun. For Teresa, who had only faces. For John, who didn’t deserve to die so young. For Mary Margaret, who had kept the family together when he could not. For his wife, Mary, who told him not to stop and then left him alone with the instruction.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He wept for the tenement. For the boy who stood in the rain outside Doyle’s workshop. For the child whose parents didn’t want him. For the young man who thought he had life figured out but was really a rejected orphan who hid from grief. For the man who stood at the rail of the City of Paris and did not weep because someone was watching. Someone had always been watching. His children needed him to be iron. His crew needed him to be iron. Mary needed him, and then Lottie needed him, and the iron had held because it had to hold. This man did not know any other way to stand.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">In Oregon, for the first time, nobody was watching.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Nobody needed him to be anything. So the iron dissolved, and what was underneath was a man who had been drowning since 1850 and had never once come up for air.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William picked up the whiskey glass and threw it against the wall, shattering it to pieces. He thudded the table again, but in a way that said “I give up.” Thud. Thud. He hangs his head low.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The lamp burned low. The rain continued. William sat at his desk with his face in his hands and he shook.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">If a man walked past the house that night and looked up at the window, he would have seen a desk. A lamp. A silhouette. Nothing worth stopping for.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>