<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c3">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c38">Chapter Thirty-Six</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c23">Send for her</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c7 c31">Spring, 1907.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The letter was short. Three lines. William’s handwriting, which had always been careful and deliberate, was pressed hard into the paper. Lottie opened it at the kitchen table on Dayton Avenue with Charlotte standing beside her, watching.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c7 c31">Charlotte. Come to Oregon. I need you to come. Wm.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie read it twice. She set the letter on the table and smoothed it flat with both hands. She studied it for clues as this was unusual.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">In seven years of correspondence William had never written those words. He had written “send money to the bank,” and “the lot is under contract,” and “tell Alex his father sends his regards.” He had written business and logistics and weather. He had never written I need you to come.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She folded the letter and put it in her apron pocket. She kissed Charlotte on the forehead. She went to the bedroom and began packing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She could not leave the next day. Or the day after.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She could not. The younger children depended on her. Charlotte was in school. Louise needed new shoes. Virginia had an earache that required watching. Alex, still young, clung to her as his father was not around. The St. Paul properties required attention, tax assessments due, a tenant on Carroll Avenue behind on rent. Lottie managed all of it. She had been managing all of it since the day William left, and the managing did not pause because her husband had written three desperate lines on a piece of paper.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She spent two weeks arranging her absence. Lottie had instructed her older children from Valentin to help out. She wrote to William Jr. and asked if he could check on the Dayton Avenue house while she was gone. Jr. wrote back the same day. Of course. He would come by weekly. He enclosed a note for his father that Lottie tucked into her bag without reading, because it was not addressed to her. She respected the boundaries between a father and a son even when she was holding both of them together from a thousand miles away.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She arranged for a neighbor to watch the younger children during school hours. She paid the taxes early. She left detailed instructions for the Carroll Avenue tenant, written in her careful hand, pinned to the kitchen board where the children would see them. She cooked meals and stored them. She labeled them. She thought of everything because she always thought of everything, because that was what Lottie did. </span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The train from St. Paul to Grants Pass took four days with connections. Lottie sat by the window and watched the country change. The prairies gave way to desert. The desert gave way to mountains. The mountains opened into the Rogue Valley and the green swallowed her vision and she leaned forward in her seat because it was, even now, stunning.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The brooch sat at Lottie’s collar now. She touched it sometimes when she was nervous. She was touching it as the train pulled into Grants Pass.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William was at the platform. She saw him before the train stopped. He stood apart from the small crowd, leaning on a walking stick she had never seen. He was thinner. His suit hung on him differently. He had the same thick mustache. His hair had gone fully white.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">The walking stick stopped her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She stepped down from the car and crossed the platform. He watched her come. He did not move toward her. He stood in place and she could see, from twenty feet away, that something fundamental had changed. This was not the man who had left St. Paul. This was not the man who had hung signs and bid contracts and charmed farmers from the seat of a scaffold. This man was holding himself up with a stick and the effort of it was visible.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“William.” She stopped in front of him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Lottie.” His voice was lower than she remembered. Rougher.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She hugged him. He put one arm around her and his chin rested on the top of her head. As they hugged she could feel him breathe softly. The rhythm was wrong. It was too shallow and rapid.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She pulled back and looked at his face. The eyes. That was where she saw it. His eyes had always carried motion, calculation, the restless intelligence of a man who was three steps ahead of the conversation. The motion was gone. What replaced it was something she had never seen in him. His eyes were pointed at her but there was nothing behind his gaze. He looked through her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“What has happened to you?” she said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He did not answer. He reached for her bag and his arm shook under it. They walked to his house and she noticed his limp. He leaned into the stick heavily on each stride. He took a long time to cover a short distance. By the time they reached the porch she had counted a few things he would need to explain.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c18">
      <span class="c1">*     *     *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She found the desk with its disordered papers and contracts unsigned. Letters from tenants sat unanswered. Two whiskey bottles stood on the shelf behind the property ledger. She found the bed unmade.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She found William on the bench outside. Sitting on the left side. The right side empty.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He was looking at the valley. The late afternoon light was doing what it did, turning the orchards to gold, making the river shine. He did not appear to see any of it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie sat on the right side of the bench. She put her hand on his. His hand was cold. His knuckles were swollen. The beat-up hands of a laborer, the residue of a former life.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Tell me,” she said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He could not look at her. He looked at the mountains instead. His nostrils flared.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“I fell off a ladder. Four years ago. My hip… My hip is finished. I can’t climb, I shouldn’t perform work above my head. There’s this surgeon in Portland. I’m not going.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Why not?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Because every doctor I’ve ever sat across from has told me someone I love is going to die. I’d rather walk with a stick.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie was quiet. She had expected something practical. A bad deal, a failed contract, a business setback. She had come prepared for the kind of problem she knew how to solve.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“There’s more,” she said.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">He tried to speak and couldn’t. His mouth opened and closed. His eyes welled. His hand, the one that had signed a thousand contracts and held dying children and hung signs in four cities, began to shake.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“I can’t stop seeing them,” he said. “The children. The rooms. The water in Boston. The blankets in Dublin. Mary in the chair.” His voice broke. Not cracked. Broke. “I could outrun it when I was working. I could paint until I couldn’t think. The ladder was the only place it didn’t follow me. Now the ladder is gone and I’m just...” He stopped. His chest heaved. “I’m sitting here, Charlotte. Every day. Sitting here with all of it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She mentioned William Jr. She said his name thinking it would anchor him, a living son, a name without an X.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Jr. writes to me,” William said. “Good letters. But reading them is hard. He’s steady, Lottie. He’s the version of me that figured it out. He found a place and stayed in it. He has what I was supposed to build. When I read his letters I can see it, the house, the neighborhood, the wife, the work. He got it right.” He paused. “And all I can think is that I am going to lose him too.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie looked at this man. Her husband. This impossible, built-from-nothing, never-stop man. She was seeing something no one had ever seen. Not Mary, who had seen him grieve but never break. Not his children, who had seen the iron but never the rust beneath it. Lottie was seeing William Boog without the scaffolding. Without the ladders and the brushes and the forward motion that had held him upright since Dublin. She was seeing the boy from the tenement, the one who had never been allowed to show pain because there was always someone in the next room who needed him to be strong.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">She held his hand tighter. The brooch at her collar caught the light. His eyes found it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“I’ve always liked that,” he said. His voice was barely audible.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">“Your daughter was very special. Just like you.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">William looked at the brooch. His face crumbled. He put his face in his hands and wept.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c2">
      <span class="c1">Lottie put her arm around him. She held him. He shook against her and she held on and neither of them spoke, and the valley went on doing what it did.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>