<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Chasing the Sun</title>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
    <style type="text/css">ol{margin:0;padding:0}table td,table th{padding:0}.c9{color:#000000;font-weight:700;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c20{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c4{padding-top:10pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c22{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c2{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c1{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:12pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c19{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c11{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c28{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:1pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c41{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c5{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c30{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c39{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c54{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c17{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c14{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center;height:10pt}.c8{padding-top:0pt;text-indent:36pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c6{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c0{color:#000000;font-weight:400;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:normal}.c3{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c16{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left;height:10pt}.c24{padding-top:18pt;padding-bottom:18pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c43{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c52{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c49{padding-top:6pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c59{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:24pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c50{padding-top:10pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c13{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c34{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c33{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c37{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c27{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c12{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c56{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c66{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:30pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c57{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:12pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c29{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c15{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c40{padding-top:30pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c55{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c63{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:2pt;line-height:1.0;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c51{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:0pt;line-height:1.1500000000000001;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.c53{padding-top:20pt;padding-bottom:20pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c18{padding-top:0pt;padding-bottom:10pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c58{padding-top:120pt;padding-bottom:6pt;line-height:1.5;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}.c36{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:normal}.c23{font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c25{font-size:14pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-style:italic;font-weight:400}.c10{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline;font-style:italic}.c64{font-size:12pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c48{font-weight:400;font-size:27pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c67{font-size:41pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c7{font-size:12pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c42{font-size:15pt;font-family:"Garamond";font-weight:400}.c44{font-size:16pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c38{font-size:14pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c35{font-size:14pt;font-weight:400;font-family:"Garamond"}.c46{font-weight:400;font-size:16pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c68{font-weight:700;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c45{font-weight:400;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c69{font-weight:400;font-size:17pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c65{color:#000000;text-decoration:none;vertical-align:baseline}.c47{font-size:18pt;font-weight:700;font-family:"Garamond"}.c61{font-weight:400;font-size:11pt;font-family:"Garamond"}.c26{color:#444444}.c31{font-style:italic}.c60{background-color:#ffffff}.c62{color:#666666}.c32{height:10pt}.c21{text-indent:36pt}.title{padding-top:0pt;color:#000000;font-size:26pt;padding-bottom:3pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}.subtitle{padding-top:0pt;color:#666666;font-size:15pt;padding-bottom:16pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}li{color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}p{margin:0;color:#000000;font-size:10pt;font-family:"Garamond"}h1{padding-top:20pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:18pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h2{padding-top:18pt;color:#000000;font-weight:700;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:6pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:center}h3{padding-top:16pt;color:#434343;font-size:14pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h4{padding-top:14pt;color:#666666;font-size:12pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h5{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}h6{padding-top:12pt;color:#666666;font-size:11pt;padding-bottom:4pt;font-family:"Garamond";line-height:1.0;page-break-after:avoid;font-style:italic;orphans:2;widows:2;text-align:left}</style>
  </head>
  <body class="c60 doc-content">
    <p class="c16">
      <span class="c28"/>
    </p>
    <h2 class="c54">
      <span>Chapter Four</span>
    </h2>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c23">Dublin’s Sun</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The lamplighters were out on Stephen Street. William closed up his stall after a long day. He was eighteen, almost nineteen. His hands were black with polish and his back was stiff from the bench. He walked the street at dusk. There was a quality to Dublin sunsets that belonged to no other city. It made you forget you were in the tenements, as it was a respite from the hard day. The sun melted behind the horizon, and the gas lamps created small islands of warmth on the wet stone, each one a circle of gold in the gathering dark.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William made his way to Michaels lane to get leather. Next to the leather shop, he passed a wash house. Through the open door, steam billowed out in great white clouds that smell of lye and boiled linen. Inside, women worked over tubs of scalding water, their sleeves rolled past the elbow, faces flushed red from the heat. Their arms were bare and worn out from wringing. The air was thick enough to chew.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">One of them was Mary. She was fifteen, small, dark-haired, with hands already rough beyond her years and a way of carrying herself that is different from the resignation around her. She had a soft jawline and delicate face, but her arms and shoulders tell a different story. The way she wrung out a sheet with more force than necessary, as though the sheet had personally wronged her.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She caught William looking. She did not smile. She did not blush or drop her gaze or perform any of the small theatre the moment might seem to demand. She just held his gaze, evenly, without coyness or challenge. I see you seeing me.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William opened his mouth to say something. Closed it. He was a young man who could charm a customer into a second pair of boots and talk his way past a landlord's suspicion, but this girl in the wash house steam had rendered him briefly, completely, useless. He nodded, an awkward, jerking motion, and kept walking.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary watched him go. The faintest trace of amusement crossed her face. She went back to her sheet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">What followed was not a courtship in any storybook sense. It was a series of small, clumsy collisions spread across two years. Each one was brief but when added up they were enough to mean something.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William walked past the wash house on Stephen Street. Too casual. His stride was wrong, too slow, too measured. He looked like a man who was trying to look like he was not looking for someone. He shot the quickest glance of all time. Mary did not look up. He walked past again. She still did not look up. The sheet in her hands received an extra twist.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary came around a corner with her arms full of mended clothes, moving fast, and collided with William on the footpath. They both stumbled. They both smiled. She had a crush, but he thought she was too young, and neither of them knew what to do with the gap between those two facts. They moved on in opposite directions, but curiosity was starting to win.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">One morning, a pair of small leather gloves appeared on the wash house windowsill. They were well-made, hand-stitched, the leather soft and carefully cut, sized for a woman's hands. No note. Mary found them when she came to work. She picked them up, turned them over, looked up the street. He was already gone.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Days later, she saw him on the street and waved him down. She held out the gloves. "These are yours," she says, and he says, "I don't think they'd fit me," and they both stand there a moment longer than the exchange requires, their eyes holding in a way that has nothing to do with gloves.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">By 1862, they walked together. Side by side, not touching, through the back lanes behind Liberties. Neither spoke. The silence between them was not empty. It was the silence of two people who have discovered that they did not need to fill the air to feel together. Their footsteps fell into rhythm on the cobblestones. The evening settled.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary sat on a low wall at the end of Michael's Lane. William stood leaning against a post. He was talking and animated, gesturing with both hands as he describes something grand. His eyes were wide and expressive. Whatever he was saying, he believed it more than a carpenter believing in plumb. Mary watched him, chin on her hand, her eyes bright with something sharper than affection.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">They stood together at the end of Michael's Lane as the sun goes down. The sky over Dublin bled orange and pink above the rooftops, and the last of the light caught the cobblestones and turned them copper.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“It’s Moran by the way, Mary Moran.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Moran? My pa told me about the Moran family. I bet our parents know each other. My father is James Boog. I’m William.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Boog?” Mary gave a puzzled smile, one corner of her mouth turned upwards.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“Yes, has your family ever mentioned mine?”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">“We only mention what we need to do to survive. My sister was bit by a rat last week. You’d think the famine is over, we still see the effects of it.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Rumor has it we are headed for another famine."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Don't say such things. We were having such a pleasant walk."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I read it in the paper. It's true."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Even if it's true, you can't control that, William."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I suppose you're right. But what are we supposed to be doing here, Mary? Bounce around from tenement room to tenement room? When the famine hits we all share a biscuit? Adding nothing to a name that means nothing?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"That's just life. That's how it goes." She shifts on the wall, pulls her shawl tighter. "My grandpa Moran once told me to focus on the good things and rely on the church. God has always provided for me, even when times were tough."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William shoots her a look. Mouth flat, eyebrows slightly raised.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Nobody else is coming to save you or me," she continues, and there is bravado in her voice now. "In the meantime, I'll be here, with my sisters and brother, helping others when I can. Mending and washing. It's just what I do."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She pauses and gazes at him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"And you seem to have found your footing. You're young for a bootmaker on his own, but you seem to be finding your way. Do you see yourself staying here?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William turned toward the west, where the sun was dropping behind the rooftops. He pointed at it, a casual gesture, half-joking, his finger aimed at the horizon.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"You see that? I'm going to follow that someday. All the way to wherever it goes."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"It goes down, William." Mary's voice is bone-dry. "It goes down every night and comes back every morning. That's what it does."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Aye, but that's just Dublin's sun. I want to see where it goes at night. The one at the edge of the world."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She looked at him. Her expression softened. Her hand rose and almost touched his arm, the fingers reaching, then stopping, then curling back into her lap.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"That makes no sense. And what'll you do when you find it?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I'll send for you."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">She shook her head, but she was smiling. She reached out and took his hand. It was the first time they had touched. His palm was rough with calluses, awl marks, knife scars, the map of a trade learned young. Her hand was rough too, cracked from lye and boiling water. For a moment the two of them stand there at the end of Michael's Lane with the sunset dying over Dublin, two pairs of working hands clasped together. Neither one let go.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c13">
      <span class="c7 c26">* * *</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Two years pass. The walks continued, from Michael's Lane to the canal, from the canal to the quays and back, through every season Dublin offers, which is mainly rain with occasional concessions. By the winter of 1863, it was understood in the Liberties that William Boog and Mary Moran were a pair. </span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">In the spring of 1864, William walked to St. Michael's Lane and asked her to spend the rest of her life with him.  There was no well thought out plan. No ring. They were standing in the doorway of the tenement where she lives with her sisters, and she said yes before he finished the question.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The Church of St. Michael and John's. The same stone walls where William was baptised as an infant. The same narrow stained glass windows. The faint smell of incense lingered, refusing to leave.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The church was nearly empty. On William's side of the aisle, no one. No family to fill the pews. No mother, no father, no uncle, no cousin. Not even Doyle. On Mary's side, a handful of women from the wash house and a few family members. Their faces were scrubbed, and the women had their best shawls on. They sat with the quiet solidarity of women who know that showing up was the gift.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">William stood at the altar in his one good shirt, scrubbed clean, hair combed flat with water. He was twenty-three. For him, the church was a formality. He loved Mary but had never been fond of the institution, the Latin, the incense, the promises extracted in exchange for blessings he was not sure he needed. Why would a loving God give him such hardships early on in life? He felt abandoned and the church didn’t help.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The boots he was wearing were his own work. The best pair he had ever made, saved for this day, the leather oiled to a deep chestnut shine. He stood the way he always stood, upright, certain, but with that restless quality in his eyes that said he was already thinking about what comes next.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary walked up the aisle steadily. Her father Joseph was there to give her away. She wore a simple dress, nothing white, nothing new. But she had done something with her hair, pinned it in a way that changes the shape of her face, and there was a small sprig of wildflowers at her collar. Not roses. Not lilies. The scrappy, stubborn kind that grows between the cobblestones on Stephen Street. She chose them herself.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The priest performed the ceremony. It was brief and unremarkable. Two poor young people in a mostly empty church, making promises that the city of Dublin had no reason to believe they can keep. The priest had done this a hundred times. His voice carried the flattened cadence of repetition. To him, this was Tuesday.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">But William's hands were steady when he takes Mary's. His eyes did not wander to the door or the window. He did not tear up at the sentiment. He was entirely present, a rare thing for a man who was always calculating, always measuring the next move. For once, she had him in his tracks.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"Do you, William, take Mary to be your lawful wedded wife?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I do."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"And do you, Mary, take William to be your lawful wedded husband?"</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">Mary looked at him. Her eyes moved over his face, scrutinizing the little details. She rarely got to see William sit still and focus on her. Her stomach tightened.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">"I do."</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">The priest blessed them. No music. No reception. No rings; they could not afford them. William took Mary's hands and holds them in the same way a craftsman held his tools: firmly, carefully, knowing what they were worth.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">They walked out of St. Michael and John's into the street. Dublin did not notice. A cart rattled past. A dog barked. A woman emptied a chamber pot from a window above, and the liquid arced through the grey air and splashed on the stones. The world was unchanged by the fact that William and Mary Boog now exist.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="c8">
      <span class="c1">They walked in opposite directions. Mary back to her tenement on St. Michael's Lane. William went back to his room on Stephen Street. They were married, but they could not yet afford to live together. The distance between their two doors was less than a quarter mile, and it might as well have been the Atlantic.</span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>